I asked her questions and got a nod here and there.
Finally I had two cups of hot chocolate and I stirred at them violently trying to get the lumps out.
I wish I had some of those tiny marshmallows.
They're fun, I said, smiling awkwardly as I handed her the mug.
It was from some rest stop in the Redwood Forrest, Paul Bunyan and his big blue Ox.
I wished I would have noticed and given her the one with the Dalmatian instead.
That would have seemed a little less awkward.
My mom sent it to me because when I was little I loved Dalmatians.
I tried to explain to her that, thanks to Disney, lots of little kids liked Dalmatians and that the phase was over, but she still kept sending me mugs and birthday cards with black spots.
I guess you could sit…on my bed if you want?
I'm sorry, that's pretty creepybut I don't have any chairs yet.
I looked around at the empty walls and the posters rolled up on the floor and told myself I would hang them up tonight. But I knew I wouldn't.
She walked over to my bed and sat down on the corner.
I pulled up a box full of books and sat down on it.
I sipped at the hot chocolate and got a big chunk of powder.
I hoped I had stirred hers a little better.
So, you lived here before me? I asked quietly. Hoping not to start another round of hysterics; she had finally seemed to calm down.
Yes.
Did you live alone? I squeezed the hot mug, already feeling like I knew the answer.
She must have been part of the couple the landlord attempted to gossip with me about.
Maybe it was a really bad breakup. Maybe he was still looking for her, still stalking her.
I thought of the man who I guess was stalking me.
But he didn't seem like he would hurt anybody.
He was too sad, too cold and lonely.
No, she said, and then she breathed into the steaming mug, and I waited, hoping that maybe she would tell me her story so that I didn't ask the wrong question and make her cry.
I lived with my fiancé, Eric.
We had rugs and towels hanging all over the walls, - she pointed to the tiny holes, the ones I never noticed - and his friends would come over and practice.
Band practice in this place?
That must have been crazy.
She smiled bigger now.
I was sure she was transporting herself back there, and I pictured four or five guys with guitars huddled around the bed where she sat and listened, maybe a drummer with his chair stuck inside the bathroom.
She stopped talking and stared down into her mug.
We sat in silence and then my eyes went to the window.
He was back.
Amy noticed the way I looked at the window suddenly, and she looked too, but nothing happened.
She didn't see him.
He walked closer to the window and cupped his hands around his face to peer inside.
Then he looked sadder than he ever had.
His cheeks pulled up and his forehead wrinkled like an old man.
It looked like he was shaking.
He put his palms flat on the window and I could see what looked like frost forming where the tips of his fingers touched the glass.
I realized in that moment, what I knew I couldn't say out loud.
Either I had a tumor growing in my brain that was making me see this man that she couldn't, or he was a ghost.
Amy, what happened to him?
To Eric.
I halfway hoped she would say, What do you mean?
I didn't have health insurance.
But she didn't say that.
She just looked at me as if she didn't care how I knew, or what I knew.
As if I wasn't even there.
She stared into the air and her mind went somewhere else again.
This time it wasn't somewhere happy at all.
He killed himself.
I pictured the man at the window, staring into the tiny mirror over the sink, with a gun inside his mouth.
I thought about what questions were appropriate, if any.
And what do you ask first?
Why or how?
I guess how was the less complicated one so I went with that.
Pills.
He swallowed the whole cabinet full.
I guess she was seeing it again.
Seeing him.
I looked at the window and he was squeezing his eyes shut too.
What was he like? I tried changing the subject a little.
I stared out the window at him as she spoke.
He was, she paused, quiet.
I never knew what he was going through in his head.
He just wouldn't tell me.
He lost his job and they kicked him out of the band.
They said they didn't need three guitar players, they said they looked stupid on stage with that many people.
My parents never liked him.
They didn't want us to get married.
They said he looked like he belonged in a homeless shelter.
But he loved that beard.
I loved it.
She trailed off and looked down at her shoes, which  were making a puddle on the wood floor.
I'm sorry, I don't know why I keep coming here.
I just feel close to him here I guess.
I was sure now that the man at the window was dead.
I guess it didn't sound as crazy to me as it should have.
She didn't.
She just stared at me and squinted her eyes like she was trying to read the fine print across my face.
Someone's been coming to the window.
I thought maybe he was homelessor, I'm not sure what I thought.
But maybe it's him.
He's there right now actually.
I expected him to disappear as soon as she turned her head to look out the window, but he didn't.
He stared into her eyes.
She turned back to me.
There? she said, confused, pointing to the frozen glass.
Yeah.
He's looking at you.
He seems really upset.
Maybe he didn't mean to do it.
I wasn't sure what I was doing.
Being an interpreter for the dead?
She looked at me at first like I was crazy, and I understood.
But she didn't get up, she didn't throw the hot brown liquid in my face and run screaming for the door. I think she must have wanted this, deep down.
She must have driven here needing to find something.
Needing this to be real.
Her face softened and she looked back at the window as she spoke.
I looked back too and of course, maybe to make me look even crazier, he was gone.
Does he…talk? she said, and I could hear the sane part of her trying to win out over whatever part believed it all.
Well he's gone now.
But no, he doesn't talk.
Not to me.
She snapped her head back towards me, the fastest movement she had made so far.
What do you mean, he's gone?
She got up and went to the window.
She looked out of it a little frantically, and then closed her eyes and took a deep breath.
She stood there with her eyes closed for a long time.
Just breathing.
Finally she turned and looked around the apartment again, this time with the softest edge of a grin.
She looked down into her mug and then up to me.
You're welcome.
I'll let you go now.
I don't want to make you late.
She walked to the sink and put her mug down next to the dirty plates and cups.
I followed her to the door as if it were still her apartment.
The sun was so bright against the snow that I had to shield my eyes with the half empty Dalmatian mug.
I'm glad I could…help?
I said, searching for the words to describe or explain what just took place.
She turned and walked back to her car, seeming almost a little embarrassed for having been there at all.
Then to my left, from the side of the house came at first a shadow, and then a man.
Eric.
Now he had a name.
I watched as he walked with his hands down from his face now and at his sides.
He stopped and looked at me, right into my eyes, for a few seconds that seemed to stretch out longer than any other few seconds of my life.
Then he walked forward again, catching up to Amy.
Amy!
I wanted to tell her that he was right there, he was right behind her. But I stopped.
She turned to face me and she was really facing him.
He was between us looking right into her face, close enough to touch her.
She got into the car and I watched as Eric got into the passenger's seat.
I knew I would never see her again by the way she looked at it as she drove off, like she was saying goodbye.
In the fall of 1989 Princeton University welcomed into its freshman class a young man named Alexi Santana, whose life story the admissions committee had found extraordinarily compelling.
He had barely received any formal schooling.
He had spent his adolescence almost entirely on his own, living outdoors in Utah, where he'd herded cattle, raised sheep, and read philosophy.
Running in the Mojave Desert, he had trained himself to be a distance runner.
Santana quickly became something of a star on campus.
Academically too he did well, earning A's in nearly every course.
His reserved manner and unusual background suffused him with an enigmatic appeal.
When a suite mate asked Santana how his bed always seemed to be perfectly made, he answered that he slept on the floor.
It seemed perfectly logical that someone who had spent much of his life sleeping outdoors would have no fondness for a bed.
Learning to lie is a natural stage in child development.
Kang Lee, a psychologist at the University of Toronto, has explored how children become more sophisticated liars as they age.
Darshan Panesar, a research assistant, and nine-year-old Amelia Tong demonstrate functional near-infrared spectroscopy technology, which Lee uses in his studies.
Except that Santana's story was a lie.
About 18 months after he enrolled, a woman recognized him as somebody she'd known as Jay Huntsman at Palo Alto High School in California six years earlier.
But even that wasn't his real name.
Princeton officials eventually learned that he was actually James Hogue, a 31-year-old who had served a prison sentence in Utah for possession of stolen tools and bike parts.
He was taken away from Princeton in handcuffs.
In the years since, Hogue has been arrested several times on theft charges.
In November, when he was arrested for stealing in Aspen, Colorado, he tried to pass himself off as someone else.
The history of humankind is strewn with crafty and seasoned liars like Hogue.
Many are criminals who spin lies and weave deceptions to gain unjust rewards—as the financier Bernie Madoff did for years, duping investors out of billions of dollars until his Ponzi scheme collapsed.
Some are politicians who lie to come to power or cling to it, as Richard Nixon famously did when he denied any role in the Watergate scandal.
Sometimes people lie to inflate their image—a motivation that might best explain President Donald Trump's demonstrably false assertion that his Inauguration crowd was bigger than President Barack Obama's first one.
People lie to cover up bad behavior, as American swimmer Ryan Lochte did during the 2016 Summer Olympics by claiming to have been robbed at gunpoint at a gas station when, in fact, he and his teammates, drunk after a party, had been confronted by armed security guards after damaging property.
Even academic science—a world largely inhabited by people devoted to the pursuit of truth—has been shown to contain a rogues' gallery of deceivers, such as physicist Jan Hendrik Schön, whose purported breakthroughs in molecular semiconductor research proved to be fraudulent.
These liars earned notoriety because of how egregious, brazen, or damaging their falsehoods were.
But their deceit doesn't make them as much of an aberration as we might think.
The lies that impostors, swindlers, and boasting politicians tell merely sit at the apex of a pyramid of untruths that have characterized human behavior for eons.
Lying, it turns out, is something that most of us are very adept at.
We lie with ease, in ways big and small, to strangers, co-workers, friends, and loved ones.
Our capacity for dishonesty is as fundamental to us as our need to trust others, which ironically makes us terrible at detecting lies.
Being deceitful is woven into our very fabric, so much so that it would be truthful to say that to lie is human.
Lying for self-aggrandizement Mark Landis, who says he was a failure as a commercial artist, spent nearly three decades imitating the works of famous painters, including this one in the style of folk artist William Matthew Prior.
Posing as a philanthropist or Jesuit priest, he donated them to art museums and enjoyed being treated with respect.
I had never experienced this before, and I wanted it to go on,” he says.
I have no feelings of conscience about this.
When I was exposed and had to stop, I was very sorry.
The ubiquity of lying was first documented systematically by Bella DePaulo, a social psychologist at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
Two decades ago DePaulo and her colleagues asked 147 adults to jot down for a week every instance they tried to mislead someone.
The researchers found that the subjects lied on average one or two times a day.
Most of these untruths were innocuous, intended to hide one's inadequacies or to protect the feelings of others.
Some lies were excuses—one subject blamed the failure to take out the garbage on not knowing where it needed to go.
Yet other lies—such as a claim of being a diplomat's son—were aimed at presenting a false image.
While these were minor transgressions, a later study by DePaulo and other colleagues involving a similar sample indicated that most people have, at some point, told one or more serious lies”—hiding an affair from a spouse, for example, or making false claims on a college application.
Lying for fun Jacob Hall's desire to become a superhero inspired a tall tale that won him the West Virginia's Biggest Liar award and a golden shovel at last year'sVandaliaGathering, a folk festival in Charleston.
My stories would be pretty boring without deception,” says Hall, who intends to spin yarns for the rest of my life, if you can believe that.
That human beings should universally possess a talent for deceiving one another shouldn't surprise us.
Researchers speculate that lying as a behavior arose not long after the emergence of language.
The ability to manipulate others without using physical force likely conferred an advantage in the competition for resources and mates, akin to the evolution of deceptive strategies in the animal kingdom, such as camouflage.
Lying is so easy compared to other ways of gaining power,” notes Sissela Bok, an ethicist at Harvard University who's one of the most prominent thinkers on the subject.
It's much easier to lie in order to get somebody's money or wealth than to hit them over the head or rob a bank.
As lying has come to be recognized as a deeply ingrained human trait, social science researchers and neuroscientists have sought to illuminate the nature and roots of the behavior.
How and when do we learn to lie?
What are the psychological and neurobiological underpinnings of dishonesty?
Where do most of us draw the line?
These insights suggest that our proclivity for deceiving others, and our vulnerability to being deceived, are especially consequential in the age of social media.
Our ability as a society to separate truth from lies is under unprecedented threat.
When I was in third grade, one of my classmates brought a sheet of racing car stickers to school to show off.
The stickers were dazzling.
