You lost, mister? he asks, after a minute or so has passed.
It is only the middle of the day and there is no need to hurry.
The others mutter their amusement at his question and I, for my part, feel obliged to break open a smile, but suddenly I have a lump in my throat that makes it difficult to swallow.
I shake my head.
No, boy.
I’m not lost.
No one can get lost on an island of this size.
Out here you can see every direction coming.
For real lost, you’d want to try a city.
Dublin isn’t bad, London is better still.
Best of all is New York.
You’ve been to New York? ” asks one of the other boys, in a small husk of a voice that pokes up out of the pack and which knows all there is to know about the ocean, even at such a tender age.
Boys grow up hard on islands.
I have,” I say, and believe me, it’s not all it’s cracked up to be.
The lead boy rolls his foot off the ball, drawing it up into the air.
He shows me his tricks, which play out as a slow but stately magic, even in the long grass.
Needing, for some reason, to impress me.
His control is not perfect but his put-on swagger of confidence more than makes up for that fact, and when the ball slips loose of its invisible leash he shapes his face so as to pass the mistake off as intentional.
It spins away but he doesn’t chase it, not even with his eyes.
You need directions to somewhere?
Age is such a conceptual thing.
Eight-year-old mouths can shape ancient expressions just as easily as they can chew gum.
Boys long to be men, to say and do the things that men can say and do.
Men, meanwhile, waste years of life on dreams of childish things.
I shake my head again, and wonder if he knows who I am, if he has at all sensed a suggestion of the bond that once bound us so fast.
No matter.
I recognise him even if he fails to recognise me.
I suddenly long to use his name, to feel it from my own mouth.
Jack.
Spoken as a brazen sigh, put out for the whole island to hear and contemplate.
A word for the wind, and an acknowledgement of sorts.
Or an admission.
But I can’t.
When a man walks away from his infant son, he gives up all claims in that direction.
That’s all right, lad,” I say, forcing my tone to steadiness.
I think I know the way well enough.
There is a murmur of breeze, a teasing first glimpse of summer carrying the smell of the ocean on its breath.
Hands in pockets, I move on up the road.
Being back is hard to take, almost as hard as knowing that I will soon be gone again.
I walk slowly, at the pace this place demands, and I know that if I were to turn, I’d find the boys still grouped together in the field, watching me.
They know who belongs here on this island and they know how to recognise tourists.
Fitting neither category quite right, I have triggered confusion.
The only difference in six years is the fresh coat of whitewash.
Six years.
Christ.
Standing here now, it feels impossible that so much time has passed.
Time should change things, really change them, not merely tug at the seams.
Since the day I left I have held a picture of this place in my mind, a matted image that hardly deviates from any of the hundred such scenic postcards that they peddle to the tourists in every seaside town and village up and down the country.
A small farmhouse cottage set back from the twist of dirt road, its thatched roof touched up with season after season of newly cut reeds and always keeping to just the right side of a sunken abyss.
And five or so acres back beyond the cottage, the land finally rolls away, collapsing down into the jagged spokes of shale that rake the sea.
A huge cloak of sky completes the picture, a sky always working, from minute to minute moiling to churn out yet more new tricks of the light, now the glare of a tilted looking- glass, now the deception of smoke.
The ocean today is calm, another April lie in a place that has practiced such skill to perfection.
Tommy is in the kitchen, sitting hunched over in a hard chair with his elbows resting on his knees and his hands laced together in a prayerful grip.
He looks up when I come to the back door but his eyes have the watery resonance of a dream and it takes him a moment to register my presence as something real.
Then he rises slowly but not quite fully, courtesy of the hard-won lumbar kink that keeps him off-balance and constantly at odds, and by way of greeting he offers a hand that is nothing but rags and sticks.
I come inside and sit at the table and he finds a bottle in the cupboard by the range.
I have known Tommy all my life, and I have known him as a father-in-law since the age of nineteen.
We have plenty to talk about, but for a while it is easier just to sit and drink.
The whiskey is a brand name type, nothing special, the stuff they make in big factories and sell in every licensed premises in Ireland, but here in this kitchen it takes on new properties.
I can taste the flavours of the island filtering up through the heat, and stones grate inside my throat. Not molten lava, but certainly blazing dust.
The old transistor radio in the corner is skipping out a fiddled reel that seems without beginning or end but the station is slipping in and out of tune in a way that brings a wonderful and priceless sense of distortion to the piece.
A happy accident, like so many of the best things in the world.
So,” he says, at last.
Where’d you end up, then?
I’m not sure why I have to think about the answer, but I do.
America,” I say, when I can.
New York first, then some other places.
But one is much the same as the next until you give up on the cities.”
My voice sounds unfamiliar to me, and feels worse.
The tone has dropped a notch, and become airy.
It takes the better part of a minute for me to recognise the fact that we are conversing in Irish.
Old words and older ways, ways that I have long since put aside.
He nods at what I have told him, sucks down the whiskey in his glass and dashes off a refill.
I hold my hand across the mouth of my glass to indicate that I’m fine for the moment, that I want to take things slowly, but he waits with the bottle until I give up and then he pours anyway.
I try not to stare but can’t help myself.
And I see that I was wrong in my earlier assumptions of time and its effects.
Six years might not have touched the rocks and the dirt of this island, but people are not rocks and dirt.
Time has all but torn Tommy asunder.
His face is a ruin of years hard spent.
Ashamed of the part I have played in making those marks, I want nothing more than to turn away, to lower my eyes, hide myself among the kitchen’s thickening shadows, maybe to run again and this time never look back.
But I owe him more than that.
You got my letter?”
I did. A week back.
I’d just about given up expecting you.”
It’s been a while, all right.
I never meant to stay away so long.”
He recognises the lie and drops his gaze.
The kitchen looks the same now as it did when I first sat here.
Same furniture, same worn paper on the walls, same curtains on the window.
But such sameness only serves to emphasise all that has been lost.
Without discussing the matter, we decide to give the whiskey a bit of a beating.
I have a bad stomach and hardly touch the stuff anymore.
But I’m not at all sure that I can bear to sit in this house without the sustenance of something strong.
I suppose Tommy feels the same way, at least today.
I was sorry to hear about Bess.”
He smiles at that, a nice, heartbroken ache of a smile that widens his eyes.
I know, boy.
She was a good woman.
The best,” he says, then pulls again at the whiskey in his glass.
And she was always fond of you.
But it was an ease to her, in the end.
The other thing had her eaten away.
By the end, you’d have been hard pushed to even recognise her from the woman she once was.
It’s a terrible waste, having to watch something like that happen to someone who was always so strong.”
It’ll be two years come June.”
He empties his glass and looks at me, and I am shocked again to see the surface for what it truly is, a cracked and crumbling façade.
I’ll tell you, Bill.
If it wasn’t for the boy, I don’t know how I’d have coped.
Big subjects lie between us like shards of glass.
Neither of us wants an argument, so we tread lightly, but the words prove difficult to come by and when spoken don’t seem nearly enough to cover all that needs saying.
The picture of the Sacred Heart hangs crooked on the wall beside the window.
That picture was crooked when I first entered this house, the better part of ten years ago now, to ask Elizabeth if she might like to come out for a walk along the shore with me.
And it was crooked, too, on the day I left, the day I turned my back on all the sorrows and the joys and walked out, with England in my sights but America very much on my mind.
Elizabeth was already gone by then, in the toughest way imaginable, her grave on the stony hillside marked by a name half-mine chiselled into rock and buried to a great depth.
Yet everywhere I turned I could see her, every voice I heard shifted with her own musical timbre.
America lay a full huge ocean away, and I wanted to believe that would be more than far enough for escape.
But it was not.
Home can be like a disease.
It gets in your blood and poisons everything; it’s with you in every heartbeat, hammering away until finally you have no choice but to give in.
And this land has a way of paralysing time, because out here all you really see is rock and ocean and sky, elements that keep a count in aeons rather than years.
What was real back then seems just as real now, and you have to dig deep beneath the ancient veneer before that illusion comes apart.
I clear my throat but my voice, when it comes, feels as if it belongs to someone else.
How is he?”
Jack?
He’s grand.
He’s good as gold.” Tommy licks his mouth, bunches his chin in a way that squeezes up his face, the pasty flesh rippling and then holding its folds.
He is thinking of something that won’t be shared, and a softness turns his mouth and sets his eyes to glistening.
Outside, the sky is doing something new to the light.
The sun has slipped behind the fringe of western cloud.
The colours feel too raw to be natural but the salt-flecked window frames a scene that is undeniably immaculate to a painterly eye.
The boy enters the house at a run, draws up with an audible gasp when he sees me.
By now, the kitchen is swamped in twilight, and I recall such moments as these from the springtime days of my own childhood, the few minutes when night feels close but not yet quite here and it is still too soon to think of sparking awake the lantern.
Of course, these days it will be the electric light, but the sense remains the same.
A groggy dusk but a most comfortable pocket in the day, time enough to take a breath, maybe to whisper a prayer for those still wandering out beyond the walls and beyond the waves, the lost ones.
Hello again.
This time I mean the smile I wear, but its edges still feel anxious.
Jack glances around, then studies me carefully.
Hello,” he says, after a long hesitation.
Again.
I’m not sure what to say because I’m not sure how much he knows about the way things are.
I find myself wishing for Tommy to act as our buffer, but he is outside, drawing water from the pump.
Good day for a game of football,” I say.
Did you win?”
Jack shrugs his shoulders.
There’s no winning or losing, it wasn’t that sort of game.
We didn’t have enough players for a proper match.”
He considers sitting, decides against it.
I feel like I can read the careworn jumble of his thoughts.
You know my granddad?”
I ought to, since I’m sitting here drinking his whiskey.
I widen my smile, trying to keep things light between us.
But he still looks uncertain. Why didn’t you say something earlier? About where you were going, I mean?
I could have walked up with you.”
You had your game, and a sunny day.
You had no business being cooped up with us, listening while we rattled our teeth about things from long ago.
You’d have been bored stupid.”
He should be nothing like I remember.
At his age, six years is as good as a lifetime.
Details sharpen and wane, hair changes colour with the sun, and running picks away every ounce of fat even as eating piles it on.
The fact that, back in the field, I had been able to pick him out from the scuffed pack of others doesn’t seem quite right, somehow.
He should have been just another stranger who happened across my path, but he wasn’t.
And now, this close and with nothing to distract, I can’t help noticing that the way he squares his jaw was the way Elizabeth squared hers whenever she was trying to be strong in the face of something troubling.
Or that he has her eyes, her shade of green that is nearly grey, a peculiarly coastal shade of eye, mirroring the sea but only at a certain dying moment of the day, when the light has been mostly sucked out of the sky and the surface turns reflective, hiding its greater depths.
I see the details of Elizabeth in him, and if I just consider the nose or the little crooked corner of that mouth, I will see details of myself there, too.
But I know when to look away.
It is the pretence that keeps this house of cards upright, and denial becomes easier with practice.
Anyone who has ever run more than two steps worth of escape understands that.
In many ways, I can’t quite believe he is standing here before me.
I have thought of him often, of course, wallowing in my guilt beyond the tuck of its pain, picturing him as he once was, an arm’s worth of flesh all sleeping smiles and wise, familiar eyes, and then imagining how he might have been with every passing year.
But time’s wicked trick was to make him seem less real to me, somehow, more a thing of dreams than blood and bone.
I’m starving,” he says, at last, and twisting away into the shadows he finds a large knife in the cutlery drawer and proceeds to cut himself a doorstop slice of soda bread.
Not the baby that I had rocked to sleep or tickled to hear him squeal with laughter, but already halfway towards being a man.
He uses the same knife to cut a wedge of butter.
We don’t get many visitors,” he tells me, over his shoulder.
He takes a bite.
Actually, we don’t get any.
I’d say you’re the first.
Ever.
A pot of stew has been simmering away on the range.
Another feature of my younger days, part of the smell of this cottage, the scent of onions and thyme and the thick chunks of mutton filtering into the aura of the room.
About an hour after my arrival, Tommy had dropped some potatoes into the pot.
You’ll destroy your appetite,” I say, just for something to take the edge out of Jack’s comment.
He looks at me again, for longer than is comfortable, even with the dusk thickening walls between us.
I get the sense that he is studying me too, matching details as I had done.
Riptides of memory claw at my mind, and I toss and turn in the old bed and try to ignore the ghosts that whisper reminders of late-hour embraces and last broken breaths.
The dreams, when they come, are time trips that deepen and dissolve, and then I am back again into the waking pit, gasping at the turgid air.
I tell myself that it’s the whiskey, but it’s not.
A little after five, I hear movement, the croak of a floorboard, outside my bedroom door.
Five minutes later I am dressed and sitting at the kitchen table.
The electric light now feels like an almighty gift, as would anything that can so completely dispel the predawn heft.
Tommy boils a kettle of water for tea, lays a few strips of bacon in a pan.
I sit there and watch his shuffled moves as he tends to his business, and decide that this sort of hour does no one any favours.
He wears yesterday’s clothes, the same as I do, but everything seems ill-fitting on him.
Braces hold up his trousers, his heavy grey shirt is only partially buttoned.
Worse, his salt and pepper hair spools wildly from the back of his head, giving him the wizened look of the truly infirmed.
Can I do anything?
I ask, but he doesn’t answer, maybe fails to hear, and I leave it at that.
Lard spatters and crackles in the pan, and the heat of the range chases away whatever little chill the early morning might carry.
We eat mostly in silence.
The food won’t be mistaken for gourmet, but the bacon tastes the way it should and the egg yolks run when cut apart.
I’m not hungry but that’s of no consequence.
Here on the island, food takes on the qualities of a ritual, another of the many duties to be fulfilled.
Tommy wipes his plate clean with a piece of buttered bread, chews it thoughtfully and then sits back in his chair.
So,” he says, barely loud enough for me to hear.
Is this about something?”
For a moment, I am lost.
Your visit, I mean.
I shake my head, no.
It’s like I said in the letter.
I just had an urge to come home.
Elizabeth’s anniversary seemed as good an excuse as any.
And I suppose I wanted to see the boy.
The heat of the tea in my mouth should feel better than it does.
Confession has never sat well with me.
And that’s all?
”I meet Tommy’s glare, then avert my eyes in surrender.
That’s all.
Because he wouldn’t want to go, you know.
Even if that was what you had in mind.
And I’d nail him to the floor before I’d let you take him out of here.
So help me Christ, I would.
This is where he belongs.
Outside the window, the darkness is splitting.
Dawn isn’t far off but it is more of a feeling than anything else, and there’s little proof yet to the eyes.
I didn’t come to take him, Tommy.
That’s not what this is about.
He’d like America for about ten minutes.
It’s nothing like here, believe me.
And besides, I know he’s not mine to take, not anymore.
It’s just that, well, after all this time I had lost the picture of him in my mind.
I wanted to see him, that’s all.
And I needed to come home, just to see that there’s still such a place.”
Tommy stares at me, reading the rest of my story in silence.
Then it is his turn to look away.
It’s been probably three or four days since he last bothered to shave, and the blue- white dusting of stubble gives him a look of wild horses and wind-battered sails.
Tourists would pay hard-won cash for a picture of a face so full of character.
He smiles at somethingand I know that a memory has broken slowly across his bow.
Minutes pass.
We drink more tea and watch the window fill with sullen grey.
He’s all questions, you know. I can see them, piled up high in his head.
They wrinkle his brow and age him fifty years.
But he never asks, not when it comes to serious business.
In a few days he might mention something in passing but he’s never outright with it.
He’s bright as a buttercup, that boy. Takes his time on things, figures them out.
Does it properly.
He understands, I suppose, that if I want him to know something, I’ll tell him.”
Does he know about Elizabeth?
How she died, I mean? ”
Some.
Not the details, though.
Bessie told him things, over the years.
Made a story out of it and filled in a few of the blanks, softened it up.
Going on about a mother’s love, and how there are all kinds of sicknesses.
For now, that’s enough.
If he ever asks for more, I suppose I’ll tell him, but I doubt it will ever come to that.
We sit until the silence becomes too much, and we are stuck in the same direction.
Then Tommy stands with a groan and gathers the plates, leaving the cups.
It is early, and we’ll drink a lot more tea yet before the time comes for me to catch the ferry.
He scrapes what little waste there is, the bacon rinds and a few crusts of bread, into a small bin, and lowers the plates into a large yellow plastic basin so that they can soak for a couple of hours.
Watching his back, I lift an envelope from inside my shirt.
Whenever I had money, they had money too; when I was on my heels they got by without.
Lately, I’ve been doing okay.
I have learned the hard way that money only tunes the material world, but it does hold a few keys and I do what I can to help.
Making a small difference is still making a difference.
I set the envelope in the middle of the table then stand and try to stretch out the knot between my shoulders that has become so familiar of late.
It shifts a little but not far.
Sun’s coming up,” I say, in a thoughtful tone that doesn’t encourage an answer, but it’s my excuse to step outside, to gaze westward at the sloe-coloured ocean lying pinned beneath the last of night and to feel another dawn peeling open at my shoulder.
The darkness feels tempered, and crumbles by degrees even in those few moments.
Back in the kitchen, Tommy is sitting again and the envelope is nowhere in sight.
We drink tea until I am sick of the taste of it, and then we keep drinking to fill up the time.
I have a question that I want to ask, whether or not Tommy has any idea why Elizabeth did what she did, but that question is always in my mind, always, and I know better than to cut it loose.
Instead I ask him to tell me how Jack is doing at school, and how he is in general, and I lean forward with my elbows on the table and make sure to absorb every word of reply.
Tommy talks with ease, now that I am no longer a threat to the world that he has been holding together.
Do you think he knows who I am?
I ask, when I have heard everything else.
He is becoming more real to me now, the boy, my son, the added colours making all the difference.
Does he ever ask about me, at all?
I mean, you know, who his father was, that sort of thing.
He knows his father was a fisherman, and that he was good with his hands.
Damn good, in fact.
Did you see him watching you, last night?
Did you happen to notice him checking out your hands?
I doubt he’ll never say so, but he knows.
He knows enough, Bill.
I nod, understanding that I can’t hope for any more than that.
By eight o’clock, I’ve had enough.
The ferry is not due to sail until eleven but I make the excuse that there are some things I’d like to do before I leave.
I want to walk a while, maybe look in on a few old faces.
And I want to stop at the graveyard, pay my respects.
Whisper a prayer for all of us, the living and the dead.
The old ghosts are waiting.
I shake Jack’s hand, because a hug would be too awkward, even though it is probably something we both want.
So long, boy, I say, hoping in my heart that it’s not goodbye.
He clenches his mouth and nods, then goes to sit in the corner.
Tommy looks at him for a moment, then follows me outside.
We walk out onto the road.
It’s been good seeing you, Bill, he says.
Take care of yourself, you hear?
My throat hurts from tears that are near but trying not to fall.
Down in the harbour a boat has come in after two or three days at sea.
The men, bone-tired, will be gutting and crating their catch for the mainland markets.
A breeze blowing in breaths from the east carries the impatient screams of the gulls as they circle and perch in anticipation of the scraps.
I’ll write, I say, the best that I can manage, and I slip my hands into my pockets and stroll away, counting the steps so that I won’t look back.
