No one in the West now in a Christian Democratic party would admit to seeing the Hitler period as anything other than disgusting.
Carnogursky was naive; he was just beginning.
But I felt, all the same, that he needed to know, as other countries had learned in the years after the war, what the word Hitler meant to Jews, gypsies and homosexuals in Europe; and how the quisling states bear a guilt for what happened.
As we left the building I presumed that Juraj had similar feelings and I spoke to him as though we shared a political outlook.
The war years, he said, we have nothing to do with them; and we still don't know enough about them.
I walked to the car with him and we drove back towards his studio.
I spent that afternoon in a house close to the studio which had a big garden.
Friends of Juraj and Tana's were hosting a barbecue.
People dropped in for a while, had a drink and left, and then others came.
Juraj and Tana went to do some work, but I stayed on.
Everyone was bright and well-dressed and thirtysomething.
The food was good, and the air was warm enough for us to sit out on the veranda, even though the sky was full of pale, low cloud.
An American couple working as volunteers in a local bank told us how Prague was full of Americans now, Bratislava was a much better place to be if you want to mix in the society.
At the first hints of twilight a couple came to collect their son who had been playing in the garden.
They were different from the rest, taller, much more glamorous, a bit older; even when they didn't talk - and the man said nothing most of the time, merely watched everything and smiled - they appeared to be the centre of things.
I wondered who they were and what they did.
He looked like someone I had seen on television.
He was in his early forties and dressed in black; his wife was elegant with long blonde hair.
He seemed half bored, sitting there nursing a beer, as though his mind was elsewhere; he exuded a restless sort of contentment.
It was only when Tana returned that I learned he was Milan Knazko, the actor who had led the revolution in Bratislava, who had addressed all the meetings in November 1989, who held the crowd in the power of his presence.
He was the one who used to shout 'Make a corridor' if someone was ill at the front of the crowd and needed to be carried to the back, until the phrase became a catch-cry.
And he was in power in the days after the revolution, and lost power in the intricate political machinations in Bratislava in 1990 and 1991, but there was talk now that he might return to politics, no one knew.
I thought of how hard it must be to have known those days when you could lead your country, hold the crowd, realising that the days would never come back, that afterwards everything would be dull and distant.
People who get a taste of power always find it hard to do without it.
He asked me what I was writing about.
Catholic Europe,' I said.
I'm Lutheran,' he replied and smiled, as if to say that he was sorry he could not be any use to me.
As they collected their son, it struck me that they were going home and would not go out again, but would sit in tonight: something a politician would never have to do.
Just a few years ago the phone rang for Knazko day and night.
It was cold now and the party was breaking up.
Tana and I agreed to walk into the city, but as we left I noticed a sort of quarry in front of the house.
It was a grotto, and there were a few candles lit in front of the statue of the Virgin, and a woman kneeling praying.
There were trees all around offering shelter, and they rustled suddenly in a gust of wind.
There were plaques stuck to the stone in German, Hungarian and Slovak, with names and dates from the early years of the century, some of them - Tana translated for me thanking the Virgin for recovery from an illness.
It was strange standing here, having been so close all afternoon without knowing that there was a grotto nearby.
As we walked back up the steps to the road I could hear shouting in the distance, as though there was a football match going on.
Tana said it was a bar.
All the clientele were sitting outside at tables, most of them were young and many of them were seriously drunk, roaring out songs and slogans and queuing at the hatch for more big glass tankards oflager.
The beer was strong, Tana said, it made you drunk easily.
It was freezing now that darkness had fallen, but this put none of the drinkers off.
We had beers and tried to talk despite the terrible, loud singing coming from the other tables.
I was not entirely sure that this scene and the scene at the grotto with the woman praying in the shadow of the tree were not from a dream, or a movie, or something imagined.
But the cold was real.
And we went back to talking about politics.
Knazko was a popular film, TV and theatre actor, Tana told me, and after the revolution he moved to Prague to become an adviser to Havel.
Once he grew disillusioned with Havel, he became a member of the Slovak parliament and Minister for Foreign Relations, but he had lost power in the many splits and personality clashes which had arisen since independence.
He was good during the revolution, she said, brilant with the crowd, but he was not so interested in the systems and structures you have to apply when you are running a country.
I told her how amazed I had been by Carnogursky's response to the question about the war years and the quisling Slovak state.
She shook her head and said that no one in Bratislava now knew much about the period; they were not sure what was communist propaganda and what was truth.
Historians would have to do more research, she said.
I did not know what to say.
We went back to Tana and Juraj's apartment.
Friends called around, people they had known for years who had nothing to do with politics, and they sat around talking for the evening.
I asked them if they knew a good bar in Bratislava that was open late, and they gave me an address which was near my hotel.
I went back to the hotel and read for a while and had a shower.
It was nearly midnight and the streets were completely deserted.
It was platonic Eastern Europe, where everything happened indoors, where nothing moved at night.
The world had closed down.
I followed my directions until I arrived at one of the many small alleys in the city, but still there was no sign of life.
This was, none the less, where they had told me to come.
I noticed an open doorway with a light on and I peered in: there was a stairway to a cellar.
I walked down. I could hear the drum thuds of rock music in the distance somewhere.
Suddenly someone opened a door and the music became loud and I knew I was in the right place.
I walked into a cellar which had been done up into a disco and bar.
It was full of well-dressed, trendy-looking people.
I went up to the bar and had a beer.
It was Sunday morning in Bratislava.
I had a vague hangover as I toured the streets, comforting now in their lack of grandeur.
Juraj had told me how much the city had been destroyed by a motorway cut through the old quarter.
The new road had barely spared the cathedral, almost grazing it as it sped past.
There was thus no great square in front of the cathedral, and there was no easy access to the old quarter or the Jewish quarter across the motorway.
The Danube always seemed distant from the centre.
They would never have done this to Prague, I found myself thinking.
I was ready to go home now, wandering around, killing time before my train was due to leave.
In the city centre, near one of the old churches, as people came out of Mass, preparing to disappear once more into the hidden domestic life of the city, there was a stall selling books by and about Dr Josef Tiso, who ran Slovakia for Hider between 1939 and 1945.
The books looked dogeared and badly produced; they were cheap.
Two elderly women sat on chairs beside the stall, a few men stood behind them.
They watched as the crowds streamed out of the church.
No one paid any attention to them, no one stopped at the stall, or bought their books.
They had the air of people who belonged to an old world, a time gone by.
And on that Sunday morning, the First Sunday after Easter 1993, the works of Dr Josef Tiso did not seem to interest the people of Bratislava on their way home from Mass.
Walt Disney's utopian dream forever changed Orlando, Florida, and laid the blueprint for the new American metropolis.
Everything happening to America today is happening here, and it's far removed from the cookie-cutter suburbanization of life a generation ago.
These huge, sprawling communities are where more and more Americans choose to be, the place where job growth is fastest, home building is briskest, and malls and megachurches are multiplying as newcomers keep on coming.
Who are all these people?
They're you, they're me, and increasingly, they are nothing like the blue-eyed Dick and Jane of mythical suburban America.
Orlando's explosion is visible in every shopping mall and traffic jam.
You can also see it from outer space.
When Earth satellites were first launched, Florida photographed at night looked like two l's standing side by side:
One long string of lights ran down the Atlantic side of the peninsula; another ran along the Gulf of Mexico side.
In between was darkness.
Today the two parallel l's have become a lopsided H.
Central Florida glows as though a phosphorescent creature from outer space has landed there and started reproducing.
It gobbles up existing communities even as it transforms scrub and swamp into a characterless conurbation of congested freeways and parking lots.
All of this is Orlando, the brand name for this region of two million residents.
When people tell the story of Orlando's stunning transformation from swamp and sinkhole to 21st-century metropolis, they begin, inevitably, with the man and the mouse.
The mouse is Mickey, the man Walt Disney.
If it weren't for Disney, the local saying goes, the Orlando region would be called Ocala, a rival town up the road.
Disney first flew over central Florida in an airplane chartered under an alias to keep his mission secret.
It was the fateful day of November 22, 1963.
So would the decision Walt Disney made that day to turn an inland Florida agricultural center into an epicenter of world tourism.
Orlando was the county seat of Orange County, but it wasn't citrus groves that prompted Disney's secret aerial reconnaissance.
During his flyover, he focused on a wasteland southwest of Orlando where alligators outnumbered people.
Porous limestone underlay the vegetal muck.
What passed for dry land was speckled with shallow, brown-watered catchments, some the size of station wagons, others the size of suburbs.
That's it, Disney proclaimed, pointing down to the future site of what he dreamed of creating in this Florida wilderness: Epcot, America's Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow.
Over the next two years, with the collusion of Orlando's top leaders, Disney secretly acquired more than 25,000 acres (10,000 hectares).
People were glad to sell dirt cheap.
This sludgy terrain was useless for agriculture.
It was far from Florida's beaches.
It was hot and muggy most of the year, yet it got so cold during central Florida's brief winters that deep freezes periodically killed the citrus crop.
Who would want to vacation in such a place?
Disney was certain most Americans would, once he worked his marketing magic on them.
By the 1960s, all over America, suburbs were replacing old neighborhoods.
Malls were driving Main Street out of business.
There was hardly a new ranch home or split-level that didn't have a TV antenna on the roof.
Disney realized that in the coming decades shows like The Mickey Mouse Club, not climate and geology, would determine what the majority of Americans would consider a safe and enjoyable place to take a family vacation.
That day, flying over central Florida, Disney decided that he, not reality, would define what constituted the Magic Kingdom in the minds and spending habits of millions of Americans in the years to come.
The interstate highway system, started by the Eisenhower Administration as part of the Cold War defense effort against communism, was already crisscrossing America.
Disney chose Orlando because it was at the confluence of two of the most important of these new thoroughfares, what today are Interstate 4 and Florida's Turnpike.
There was also a deeply personal reason he located Disney World there—the same one that still lures people to Orlando today.
In Florida's boggy, buggy, empty midsection, Walt Disney perceived a second chance.
His original theme park—Disneyland, in southern California—covered fewer than 300 acres (120 hectares).
It soon was ringed with the suburban blight that its success inevitably attracted—motels, strip malls, copycat amusement parks.
Disney never forgave himself for not making Disneyland big enough, but in Florida he hoped to rectify that mistake.
He set out to create an Adventureland where nothing was left to chance.
Arriving visitors would not be permitted to choose their own parking spaces; smiling Disney characters would do that for them.
In this new, bigger, better Magic Kingdom, water could not be the tannic brown common in central Florida. So Bay Lake was drained, the sludge removed, and clear water pumped into the resulting lagoon.
Even dry land would be turned into another Disney illusion:As you traverse the theme park, you are actually walking on the roof of an immense, underground control building from which the operation is run, staffed, and supplied.
Disney's new empire in central Florida would be marketed as Disney World.
Its official name was, and remains, the Reedy Creek Improvement District.
Thanks to a sweetheart deal with the state legislature, the lands Disney purchased were detached from the rest of Florida to form a Magic Kingdom, above and outside the law.
Even now, Disney World's rides are exempt from state safety inspections.
Democratic process is excluded, too.
Power remains in the hands of a board of supervisors composed of Disney allies.
The most telling theme park in Orlando isn't even Disney's.
SeaWorld is populated with sharks and whales plucked from the ocean and transported 50 miles (80 kilometers) inland.
(Marineland, Florida's original aquatic attraction on the Atlantic coast, is a fossil of its former self.)
Every year, hundreds of thousands of people drive down the Atlantic coast of Florida and turn inland to visit America's premier saltwater attraction.
SeaWorld bespeaks the essence of Orlando, a place whose specialty is detaching experience from context, extracting form from substance, and then selling tickets to it.
In this place of exurban, postmodern pioneers, the range of choices is vast even when the choices themselves are illusory.
Here life is truly a style:You don't want to live in a mass-produced, instant community?
No problem.
Orlando's developers, like the producers of instant coffee, offer you a variety of flavors, including one called Tradition.
Structurally it may seem identical to all the others.
In Orlando's lively downtown, it's possible to live in a loft just as you would in Chicago or New York.
But these lofts are brand-new buildings constructed for those who want the postindustrial lifestyle in a place that never was industrial.
Orlando's bright lights are not the garish displays of Las Vegas or the proud power logos of New York.
Instead, Orlando glimmers with the familiar signage of franchise America: Denny's, Burger King, Quality Inn, Hampton Inn, Hertz.
Orlando also leads in the culinary transformation of the exotic into the familiar.
From its Orlando headquarters, the Darden Corporation, the city's first Fortune 500 company, mass-markets theme foods.
It standardizes the output of Red Lobsters and Olive Gardens everywhere.
All over Orlando you see forces at work that are changing America from Fairbanks to Little Rock.
This, truly, is a 21st-century paradigm: It is growth built on consumption, not production; a society founded not on natural resources, but upon the dissipation of capital accumulated elsewhere; a place of infinite possibilities, somehow held together, to the extent it is held together at all, by a shared recognition of highway signs, brand names, TV shows, and personalities, rather than any shared history.
Nowhere else is the juxtaposition of what America actually is and the conventional idea of what America should be more vivid and revealing.
Welcome to the theme-park nation. I fell in love with the sense of potential, says Rick Tesch, one of modern Orlando's boosters.
I saw Orlando as a great place to be, globally.
Tesch could be talking about franchising car rental agencies. Instead, he is talking about religion.
In the 1980s, Orlando's civic elite had decided it could be a leader in faith as well as theme parks.
For Tesch, a devout man working for the Orlando Economic Development Commission at the time, the opportunity to lure religious organizations to the Orlando area was a privilege as well as a challenge.
One prime target was Bill Bright, the late founder of the Campus Crusade for Christ.
Like Disney, Bright had started out in southern California; his spiritual enterprise, like Disney's entertainment enterprise, soon needed more growing space.
Tesch set out to prove that Orlando was just the place for the Campus Crusade to put down roots.
Orlando's Hometown U. S. A. persona was a draw.
So was the fact that, in religion as in other fields, Orlando was on the cusp of mighty changes in America.
Originally a southern prong of the Bible Belt, Orlando was morphing into a stronghold of Middle American spiritual as well as cultural values, a result of massive migration out of the central United States into central Florida.
God wants me to come here, Bright is reported to have said after an exploratory visit. So did the Orlando Economic Development Commission.
Working with civic leaders and private donors, it helped broker a deal in which the Campus Crusade for Christ, in exchange for establishing its new World Center for Discipleship and Evangelism in Orlando, was given 165 acres (67 hectares) of land, for free.
The equivalent of Disney's Reedy Creek deal, it hastened Orlando's transformation into an important nexus of religious enterprise.
Today dozens of megachurches and religious organizations, many with multimillion-dollar budgets, are located in the area.
The megachurch is the culmination, at least so far, of the integration of religious practice into the freeway-driven, market-savvy, franchise form of American life.
The emergence of Orlando's largest megachurch, the First Baptist Church, from a small congregation into a powerful, wealthy organization, parallels Orlando's own transformation.
The turning point came, as in many Orlando stories, when a sense of mission intersected with a real estate opportunity.
In the early 1980s, First Baptist's pastor, Jim Henry, believed the church should get out of Orlando's downtown.
He had arrived in 1977 from rural Mississippi.
I felt this town was going to take off.
It had good connectedness: spiritual, business, political connectedness, he says.
He foresaw that the old downtown would no longer be the epicenter of Orlando.
At his instigation, the church formed a search committee.
I told the people looking for land, 'Look 150 years ahead'.
I wanted us to move to where the new center of Orlando was going to be, he says.
When the group found a parcel of 160 acres (65 hectares) located near the intersection of two freeways, offering access to both Disney World and the airport, Henry knew First Baptist had found its promised land.
Today the church offers the same assemblage of green space, ample parking, and low-slung buildings you find in Orlando's better commercial parks and residential developments.
Its growth has come from customizing its services to the needs of a community that craves a sense of connectedness.
It offers parenting workshops, game rooms for teenagers, and support groups for divorced people.
We've done what Wal-Mart and football have, Henry says.
We've broken down the idea that 'big is bad'.
In the process, Henry, who's now retired as pastor, has become an authority on megachurch growth management.
His book Dangerous Intersections shows churches how to cope with their growth.
As Henry explains it, one of the trickiest things about getting people to worship is getting them in and out of the parking lots.
At First Baptist, sermons are coordinated with the time required to get one congregation into their cars and back on the freeways.
A system of color-coded signals keeps preachers from talking too long, creating traffic jams on the access ramps and chaos in the parking lots.
You begin with faith, Henry says, and in his case at least, you end up as an expert in traffic management.
Very few people, as they talk about the immense changes reshaping Orlando and their lives, mention another American genius who left his mark here even before Disney arrived.
Jack Kerouac—guru, bad boy, the literary superstar who wrote the Beat Generation's manifesto, On The Road—came to Orlando, by bus, in December 1956.
The following year, in an 11-day creative frenzy, he wrote The Dharma Bums in an apartment with a tangerine tree out back, shoveling the words through his typewriter in the heart of hot, flat Florida.
Kerouac's tumultuous vision was a howling rant against the plastic shackles he perceived imprisoning the human spirit in mid-century America.
Looking out his window at the neighbors, he scorned the middle-class non-identity which finds its perfect expression … in rows of well-to-do houses with lawns and television sets in each living room with everybody looking at the same thing and thinking the same thing at the same time.
Whereas Disney was looking for control, Kerouac personified the American urge to defy control.
