Rhythm and expression
The tendency of repetition is also inherent in muscle and nerve tissue.
This persistence of movement continuation is a characteristic that aids in the rhythmical establishment of a movement in the sense of the repetition and periodicity.
Rhythmic movement easily becomes habitual and automatic, and that is important in the development of a perfected technique.
It is only when skills become automatic that they can be relegated to the lower centers, leaving the higher centers free for the creative and artistic factors of expression.
One of the most vital factors in dance is the physical, sensuous effect of rhythmic motion.
When made too insistent, however, it is likely to pile up more emotional energy than can be satisfied — and be carried to the point of explosion.
One of the most perplexing problems in obtaining sincerity of feeling and clarity of communication is that of conveying the emotion that is central to the dance.
Inexperienced dancers often give evidence of intellectual comprehension and may have a real appreciation of technical problems involved and of the emotional significance of the content that is to be danced; yet this comprehension has little effect on their ability clearly to objectify in movement what has laid hold of their understanding.
This difficulty frequently lies in the inability to perceive the adequate rhythmic forms as a correlate of the emotion being expressed.
Rhythm is the primary, fundamental art form; its study is essential to all art, but especially to dance because of the letter’s kinesthetic basis of perception.
Because its regulating, stimulating powers are present in all that we think, feel, and do, it is imperative that we have some concept of it as a force.
Rhythm is difficult to define.
Its significance is arrived at only by actually experiencing it.
Whenever we experience rhythm in action, we usually describe it by saying the movement felt right or had a swing.
Rhythmic sensations feel right because of the right proportioning of the time and stress values that bind all the related parts into a unified experience sensed as a whole.
This regulating and binding force is rhythm.
Organically, rhythm is a fundamental tendency in all our responses and is a principle of action in our physical organism.
Rhythm manifests itself in muscular tensions, and the mind becomes aware of this force by means of the kinesthetic sense.
Movement implies energy release, and, because movement takes place according to laws of structural functioning which have a natural timing setup, rhythm as an experience may be said to be measured energy.
The organic characteristics of rhythm are also present in other forms of natural activity, such as thinking and feeling, which are proceed by rhythmic pulsation.
The rhythms of song and poetry and the cadences of speech are as much manifestation of organic rhythm and breathing, walking, or any other muscular action.
Expressive movement is obviously rhythmical, not only because of structural patterning, but because of the influence on its form by thought and feeling, both of which fall into responsive rhythms.
In relation to organization, rhythm may be considered as a process by which events taking place in time are marked off, related, and organized.
Without it all would be confusion.
But the fundamental object of rhythm is to minister both to the stimulation and to the expression of feeling.
Thus rhythmic form is the channel for reflecting mental experience.
To a certain extant the rhythm of emotion determines the rhythm of motion.
So it is very unlikely that the internal rhythms of any two individuals are the same.
In fact, the individual variations of the basic rhythmic patterns are what give unique value and interest to every student’s expression.
If inner and outer rhythm are one, communication is rich and complete; if not, the dance is likely to be too physical, too much of the body, rather than of the mind through body.
The source of this union between feeling and movement is a sensitive comprehension of idea, mood, rhythm, and movement.
Rhythm is also a potent source of inspiration.
From the rhythms of his own bodily action, or from the rhythms of music and poetry, and from rhythm of activity in his environment, a dancer may derive his themes.
Any one of our senses may be employed in the perception of a rhythmic experience.
Just as we are able to recognize a rhythmical sequence through the auditory sense, so we can learn through the kinesthetic sense to be aware of muscular sensations in terms of their duration and degrees of stress and force.
It is this sense that informs us of the positions of the body and its parts, of the amount of effort and speed necessary for execution.
Consciousness of meaning in movement comes through knowledge of its range, varying degrees of force, time relationships, and speed.
In experiencing these rhythmic phases we produce a fundamental and elemental response, primarily organic, secondarily intellectual and discriminating.
It is through the medium of these fundamental responses and their resulting stimuli of association that there structural factors arouse imaginative and emotional responses.
In such a process there is involved a subtle creative manifestation of the feeling life.
Thus we see that by rhythm much more is implied than just keeping time.
In its broadest meaning rhythm may be said to be the mold through which expressive life flows in creating its forms.
In dance, movements are the motor symbols of action within the mental life of the dancer.
Through action, dance expresses feelings aroused by the sensations of movement.
The dynamic phases of rhythmic movement may in brief be said to be: duration, or the relative length of time taken by any single movement; stress, or the degree of force or intensity with which energy is released; and tempo, or the rate at which movements follow one another.
A series of movements may be executed in slow or rapid tempo without affecting the relative time of the single constituents, but change in tempo will bring about a change in the kinesthetic experience.
These three phases of movement, all of which exist together in any action series, and out of whose interrelations the endless variety of dance patterns are built, determine the outward form of the dance; and in them are inherent the dynamic, generation causes of expression.
Just as every animal has an action and a rhythm peculiar to itself, so man moves according to his nature.
Every emotion has its appropriate and peculiar movement.
There is movement of joy, rage, excitement, sorrow, peace, fear, devotion, and so on through the list of feeling states.
Movement, as outward, observable behavior, in an integration of the emotional, intellectual, and physical natures.
Action implies a desire (emotion) which prompted it, a thought (intellect) which shaped it, and a visible movement of physical body to carry it out.
That is to say, a desire stimulates a thought, and the thought embodies itself in an act.
Two of these component activities are invisible and belong to the consciousness, but they are revealed by the third component, which is visible and belongs to the body.
Mental states can be expressed only by actions, and can be communicated only through their visible, characteristic attributes in the observable body.
The development and control of the skill necessary for this body expression come through kinesthetic perception.
To gain this power of discrimination, one must give attention to muscular sensations, and this study must be reinforced by understanding of basic principles of motion.
As an aid to efficiency, therefore, although not as a complete method, some sort of systematic body training is necessary.
It is difficult to practice to separate the elements of physical skill in dance from its ideal essence, although it is clear in theory that movement is not art until it is emotionally charged and controlled by intellectual discipline.
It is clear, too, that the perfection of the body must mean more than the development of muscles and nerves; it must mean also a trained, enriched attitude of the whole human being.
At the same time the value of gymnastic exercises should be recognized.
From exercise and directed study the student can deduce rules which will be highly corrective while they are also formative.
He will discover in his own experience ways and means which will take a significant part in producing satisfying art and which could not be taught from the outside.
Out of such studies a rich and varied vocabulary of responsive movements comes automatically into play, and the form of movement, grounded in artistic intellectual selectivity, will be reflective of the emotions which cause it.
To develop a motor technique, and a fine discriminating kinesthetic sense to control it, is one of the solutions to the problem of dance education.
It is a process of discovery, analyses, and synthesis, and a perfecting, according to an intellectual ordering, which demands the best efforts of both mind and body.
The mental effort required to obviate mistakes demands so much concentration that other factors, such as expression, are bound to suffer.
Repeated activity becomes automatic and is finally executed with little or no thought, thus freeing the mind for the activities of artistic creation.
The onset of a stimulus result in a general bombardment of the nervous system, and out of this generalized activity there emerge the specialized paths we term skills.
In this respect, all motor technique are the same.
Physical skill has the same general conditions whether it is concerned with tennis, swimming, dance, the playing of an instrument, or the handling of tools.
Technique of the physical instrument is motor intelligence.
Its acquirement is dependent upon intelligence and purpose and not upon mechanical drill or application of formula.
Dance technique is the dancer’s artistic integrity working through his nerves and muscles.
But to acquire technique one must first have desire, must want to.
The very inception of achieving is wanting to achieve.
Indifference and accomplishment can never exist side by side.
The greater the interest, the keener is our power.
We are possessed to find out the hows and whys.
Intellectual curiosity does not permit any rest until there is a solution.
In indifferent attitude, or one of mechanically plodding along the line of least resistance on the chance that something may happen, will not bring perfection.
The success of any act, no matter how simple or complex, depends upon a conscious direction of effort toward the ideal.
Exactness in details, as opposed to slackness in the early stages, is essential.
A desired result can be produced only by the perfecting of its elements.
In the learning of any new act or movement, every sensation must be observed and registered, so that action becomes associated with certain effects in consciousness.
These impressions, at the next effort of reproduction, will be useful in duplication of the effort or in avoidance of duplication according to one’s abilities in recognition, comparison, analyses, and synthesis.
When acts are performed consciously, the differences in action and effect can easily be noted.
Such a worker will remember what was done, for he was conscious not only of what he was doing but why!
Although the will is of importance in the expressive act, it can never be a substitute for the impulse to expression.
The will is ever present, but blended with intellectual, emotional, and spiritual actions in a perfect unity.
This blend of mental forces results in a kind of superintelligence that knows the effect before it starts the cause.
This co-operation with the other mental faculties is one of the secrets of success.
The will can control and guide, but never can supply the impulse to expression except as it serves mental concentration.
In this capacity it holds the mind to the idea in hand, directing and restraining impulses until they become diffused through the whole organism.
It collects a scatterbrain and makes an artist of the artisan.
When the mind is so possessed, the force of its imagery tends to release itself over some motor path and becomes objectified in movements of dance.
Here the will ceases to function and joins forces with the activity of the other mental actions concerned in expression.
The true impulse to expression is deeper than the will.
Unless the spirit commends the will and furnishes the motive to will or to express, expressive results are in danger of being superficial and limited.
Power of expression depends upon power of thought and feeling.
Nothing is detected so quickly as the resolution to be expressive and to appear emotional.
Technique and expression really become one and the same thing, if we think of technique as the only adequate means of expression.
Developing technique means directing and changing the untrained, seemingly natural, movement patterns into their related art forms.
The natural should mean the perfect state.
In this light, correct might be substituted for natural.
So few people have developed, without training, the control necessary for good body motion; consequently the first step is to train back to the natural or correct way of moving.
This is the only basis upon which consciousness of art movement can be established.
But we must remember that patterns of the individual are revealed in the faulty, habitual movement.
Every movement reveals organic unity because of its origin.
In working toward a perfected technique we consciously direct untrained, unstudied movement into forms that aim toward a goal.
The original, more instinctive form becomes conditioned by the ideal form.
And only as the mind can conceive of these new forms as related to the familiar organic forms will a true and expressive style develop.
In building technique, than, we should try not to thwart and block the familiar reaction tendencies, but to release them in order that they may contribute to, and co-operate with, the goal-aiming efforts of the mind.
If the aim is not uppermost, spontaneity will be lost because of distrust in instinctive inspiration.
Organic unity between inner and outer experience must not be destroyed.
New forms should mean growth with the life pattern, not the destruction of it.
This kind of effort, or technique, when working from the ordinary toward the ideal, causes the body to take on an abstract impersonal quality resulting in an innate, unsought classical beauty.
Knowledge and expression
Everyone brings to such a study some general but inarticulate understanding with which to build.
But with a recognition and application of clear and exact principles, he can approach a scientific study of movement.
There must be an understanding of the fundamental science of movement before the skill for its control can develop.
No artist can afford to let temperament come between him and the facts which condition his work.
The essence of science is the discovery of the truth of actual conditions.
This discovery provides the knowledge and security with which any artist or student artist may work.
There need be no antagonism between science and art.
Science will not make art — but it will contribute to a truthful art.
It is of the greatest importance, when we are working toward art expression, to know the conditions under which the mind creates and the nature of the medium through which it works.
Our reactions are so likely to be fleeting and uncaught.
We must, to be true to experience, be reinforced with understanding.
Through analyses of conditions that contribute to expression comes the necessary understanding by which we gain clearer consciousness of our abilities as well as a keen appreciation of the efforts of others.
But too much analyses may obscure the real significance of reality — something may escape, so that in the reconstruction there is less of substance than in the beginning.
There is no danger in this process if we continually realize that the real phenomenon resides in the whole — which is something more than the sum of its parts.
Analysis proves its usefulness when separate elements fuse into one impression.
The earlier observations are not lost, though they no longer stand out as separate judgments; rather they have gone to enhance the total impression.
Analysis then ceases to function; it is as if everything had been clear from the beginning.
In art, all knowledge must ultimately become intuitive.
Every form of information should be so absorbed and transformed by the personality that the artistic expression which has grown out of that knowledge seems to be the inevitable product of spontaneous impulses.
Such is the effect of the very greatest works, the works of supreme art.
For dance to be vital to an individual life its technique must be experienced in a way that recognizes the anatomical, physiological, and psychological connections and disciplines.
It should be conceived in terms of those experiences that lie within the realm of the intellect, emotions, and spirit, and not in terms of arbitrary skills and forms except as they assist the function of expression and communication.
In the end, everything depends upon the individual.
The instructor can give reasons for, can show how; but, when it comes to the act itself, the results will depend upon the student’s advancement in control and artistic integrity and his potentialities as an artist.
It is best, as well as inevitable, that such should be the case; for, when the body moves according its structural principles, it moves like all other bodies and suggests the same forms.
But, when movement is submitted to the dictates of an individual intellect and emotion, it ceases to be mechanically determined and becomes a manifestation of a unique and individual being.
Everyone inherits, basically, the same fundamental and primary nature.
Through a fundamental and universal education this primary nature will be understood as the plane where instinctive impulses operate, and where impulses will be understood as powerful motives to action.
And, finally, these forces will be trained to serve the will and desires of an intellect impelled by ideas so that the individual student can bring all his powers to bear upon the life of his choosing.
Of course, we can dance or teach dancing without knowledge concerning the setup that governs our responses.
Very effective techniques of movement can be learned by prescription and imitation, and, because of the innate pleasure in obeying the impulse to move, such learned to movement may well be pleasurable and satisfying.
But, if imitation and prescription are too much relied upon, they are likely to cause the student lose initiative and to become too mechanical, disarranging his individual adjustment rather than correcting it.
Imitative activity very seldom gets the same results as inner creative activity.
However, if imitation is used so as to start the inner activity of changes, it can be helpful and stimulating to new experiences — otherwise the essences of what is being imitated are missed.
Conscious imitation as blind copying, however, is usually stilted and artificial.
A student should be taught to teach himself.
It is only as he is able, through his own effort to apply, to assimilate, and to ponder what he has learned that he is truly benefited.
To attain genuine and convincing expression the creative mind needs to be permitted to organize and endow its materials with a specific structure and individuality.
To appreciate the origin and nature of dance, to understand the workings of its psychophysical-anatomical instrument, and to be convinced of its potentialities for emotional enrichment and self-direction, is to know the fundamental truth and enduring values of dance.
You lost, mister? he asks, after a minute or so has passed.
It is only the middle of the day and there is no need to hurry.
The others mutter their amusement at his question and I, for my part, feel obliged to break open a smile, but suddenly I have a lump in my throat that makes it difficult to swallow.
I shake my head.
No, boy.
I’m not lost.
No one can get lost on an island of this size.
Out here you can see every direction coming.
For real lost, you’d want to try a city.
Dublin isn’t bad, London is better still.
Best of all is New York.
You’ve been to New York? ” asks one of the other boys, in a small husk of a voice that pokes up out of the pack and which knows all there is to know about the ocean, even at such a tender age.
Boys grow up hard on islands.
I have,” I say, and believe me, it’s not all it’s cracked up to be.
The lead boy rolls his foot off the ball, drawing it up into the air.
He shows me his tricks, which play out as a slow but stately magic, even in the long grass.
Needing, for some reason, to impress me.
His control is not perfect but his put-on swagger of confidence more than makes up for that fact, and when the ball slips loose of its invisible leash he shapes his face so as to pass the mistake off as intentional.
It spins away but he doesn’t chase it, not even with his eyes.
You need directions to somewhere?
Age is such a conceptual thing.
Eight-year-old mouths can shape ancient expressions just as easily as they can chew gum.
Boys long to be men, to say and do the things that men can say and do.
Men, meanwhile, waste years of life on dreams of childish things.
I shake my head again, and wonder if he knows who I am, if he has at all sensed a suggestion of the bond that once bound us so fast.
No matter.
I recognise him even if he fails to recognise me.
I suddenly long to use his name, to feel it from my own mouth.
Jack.
Spoken as a brazen sigh, put out for the whole island to hear and contemplate.
A word for the wind, and an acknowledgement of sorts.
Or an admission.
