Then I went and walked back up the path toward the high-rise.
When I got home, I collected all of Cookie's toys, her food bowl and water bowl, the little purple ball with a bell in it, the stuffed squeaking duck that was almost her size.
I lined them all up on the mantel in the living room so that I could watch them disappear, one after the other.
Was the disappearing growing faster every day?
No.
Was it moving geographically from west to east, or east to west?
Was it vanishing the world alphabetically, taxonomically, or in chronological order?
It wasn't.
As hard as we tried to understand it, there didn't seem to be much order to the disappearing at all.
A week would go by with everything pretty much in its proper place, and then all of a sudden there was no such thing as magazines, not in your home or anyone else's, and nobody to bother making new ones.
Did it work its way down from the biggest things to the smallest?
Was there a plan?
When you were in the right mood, when you were too tired to care much, it was beautiful—like watching the house across the street as someone walked through it turning each of the lights off in order, one by one, for the night.
I sat on the floor of my brother's empty living room and ate four chocolate chip granola bars in a row.
I had already called you once today, but I was working on a reason to call you again.
Experts suggested that the things disappearing most quickly now might be intangible, metaphys- ical: concepts, memories, and modes of thought were just as vulnerable to erasure, they said, though they couldn't give any concrete examples.
I thought I'd better call you to see if you still remembered that Cookie had gone.
··· I pushed the buttons in order.
It rang twice, and then I heard you.
Hello? you said.
It's me, I said.
It's you, you said back to me.
I just wanted to call to see if you still remembered Cookie, I said.
Of course I still remember Cookie, you said.
There was silence on both our ends, a blur of static on the line between us.
What do you remember? I asked.
I remember that you picked her because she bit you, you said, and you decided it was important that you win this one animal over.
I remember you didn't know how to hold a cat at the beginning, so you grabbed her just anywhere.
You grabbed her in the middle and tried to pick her up that way.
You got bit a lot, you added.
I have your number memorized, I said.
That's good, you said.
··· And I said I should let you go, and you said good night and we hung up on each other.
I missed you more now than I had when I lost you.
I was forgetting the bad things faster than I forgot the good, and the changing ratio felt a little bit like falling in love even though I was actually speaking to you less and less.
I used to play a game I called Are We Going to Make It?
You were playing too, whether you knew it or not.
It worked like this: you'd forget that we were going to see the movie together and you'd go by yourself instead or with a friend, while I waited at home.
Or you'd stay at work until four in the morning and forget to charge your phone, and you'd wake me up on the couch where I had fallen asleep trying to stay up for you.
Then I would ask myself: Are We Going to Make It?
And the next thing, whatever thing you did next, would become the answer, a murky thing that I'd study until I was too tired to think about it anymore.
An independent physicist living in Arizona had become famous for his theories on how the Disap- pearing might be a sort of existential illusion, analogous to an optical illusion.
He said the fact that we still remember what's been taken and can picture it in our minds is proof that it still exists.
It's like how you only see the duck or the bunny at a given moment, never both, he said.
Only imagine that instead of knowing the bunny exists alongside your experience of the duck, you believe that it's been irrevocably lost.
It's all about vantage point, he said, temporal vantage point: the way you might lose sight of your house when you drive away from it, but find it again when you look for it from the top of a hill.
To think your house was lost, he said, would be loony.
Disappeared things were like this, he said, coexistent but obscured in time.
This was his theory of spatiotemporal obstruction.
Those who believed in it believed that there was one special place that offered temporal higher ground.
They made pilgrimages to a particular beach in Normandy where the cliffs were chalky white, the color of doves, and where it was rumored that recently disappeared things sometimes reappeared, soft-edged and worn and looking thirty or forty years older.
In 1759 a twelve-year-old girl was said to have drowned herself there to avoid marriage to a much older man.
Plastic bags were disappearing too, but my brother had had so many of them to begin with.
Then I picked up the phone to call you back.
I put your number in from memory.
Instead of you, I heard an error song and a recorded voice telling me my call could not be completed.
I dialed the Bureau of Disappearances.
At the prompt, I pressed 1 for person,  then 1 again for male.
I pressed 3 to indicate age twenty-one to thirty.
Then I was supposed to press 3 for friend,  but instead I pressed 2 for lover or significant other.
I hoped you wouldn't mind.
The beautiful female voice declared you a male lover between the ages of twenty-one and thirty and asked if that was correct.
I pressed the pound key and then I described you.
I remember it was a bright morning in the fall and I woke onto your face looking in on mine.
Some mornings when we woke together we pretended that one of us had forgotten who the other was.
A good story was long, and the best stories could make me feel like I had gotten a whole second life, a bonus one.
Yellow leaves outside the window threw yellowish light on the sheets as you told me not to worry.
I was safe, I was with you.
We had been living together since grad school; we met on the hottest day of the year, near the gondolas in the middle of the park.
We were sitting on benches facing the pond and eating the same kind of sandwich, turkey and swiss in a spinach wrap.
But that's what actually happened, I said.
I know, you said, making a fake guilty face.
In the fall afternoon, leaves fell off whenever they fell off: it didn't depend on their color or weight or the force of the wind outdoors.
You added: I just couldn't think of anything.
··· The disappearing when it started happening was everywhere, subtly, it hung on our days the way a specific hour does on a moment, dragging it down and reminding you of how much time you've let pass.
It was a flavor you woke up with in your mouth, like the taste of blood on a dry winter morning.
This made leaving easier in the moments before I had realized what I was planning to do.
I stood outside our building with no keys, and I was calling you over and over on the cell phone even though I knew you were at work.
Each time I got your voice mail I imagined that you had vanished, until one time I imagined that you had vanished and I didn't feel any way about it.
It was like I had disappeared.
I saw the things continuing on without me, and I didn't mind.
I went to the ATM on the corner and pulled everything out of my checking account.
Checking accounts were still around then, existing invisibly somewhere.
Possibly they exist still, even though the banks went.
I took the cash and our car and got on the highway, driving on I-80 west toward Chicago.
If it hadn't been the End of Days, would we still be together?
The most difficult thing about leaving you was discovering that I went on: that I had to be there sixteen hours a day watching myself live my own life, that I had to stay near myself all the time as I asked myself question after question, that I had to sit there in my body and watch the phone ring over and over next to me that night, after you had gotten home.
After the announcement, people did one of two things.
Either they tried to care more, or they tried caring less.
They decided to survive, to collect and hide and ration, or they decided to let the amount of time left in their lives work away at them.
They tried to grow vegetables in their small backyards or they let the yard get overgrown, falling asleep drunk in the afternoon on a lawn chair encircled by weeds.
For a while we did whatever we had chosen with dedication.
But it was difficult to stay dedicated for more than a few weeks, and eventually we middled, caring about things sloppily and in spurts.
We poked at the dirt and then fell asleep, feeling that we should have done more or maybe less.
In the end, there was only one kind of person.
In the master bedroom I turned down the sheets.
My brother wouldn't be back again, but I made the bed every day to be a good guest.
I made it the hotel way, everything tucked in, the sheets stretched tight across the mattress and leaving no room to shift or wrinkle. Sleeping in it meant that you had to tear it all apart.
I yanked the pillows out from underneath the blankets, pulled the sheets down to the foot of the bed, let the comforter fall to the floor.
Then I climbed in.
I have one of the last working phones, I said out loud.
I had started sleeping with the lights on: I wanted more minutes of seeing, more things I could see if I happened to open my eyes.
Outside the window there was snow falling, falling like movie snow, all the dreamy fluffy bits drifting around in the light of a single streetlamp.
I wished that I loved the woman on the Disappearance hotline so that I could call and hear her voice anytime I wanted, and feel that feeling that it didn't seem I'd be feeling again.
Whoever loved her was lucky, if they were still around.
I watched the snow slow down, thin out.
Then it was two or three pieces at a time, falling reversibly, wavering up and down and up again like they didn't know where to go.
The light stayed on for a few minutes.
I saw my reflection in the window.
Then the bulb blanked out overhead.
In the dark I could hear the cord swinging empty above, but I saw nothing.
I knew from the mounting silence that other things were vanishing too.
They say everything in the world vibrates at its own specific frequency, each thing releases a tiny bit of sound.
But nothing, nothing, doesn't vibrate at all.
I felt the heat radiating from my body with no place to go.
Dots of darkness that weren't really there drifted past my eyes.
How would I know I was vanishing if there were nobody around to see me?
What would tell me that I wasn't just falling asleep?
In the darkness I couldn't see the disap- pearing any longer but I knew it was all going, going far far away.
Until gradually I didn't even know that anymore.
There was a woman in Lincoln, Nebraska, who claimed to be able to communicate with the disappeared.
You could call her on the telephone and tell her who you were looking for, their full name, how old, how tall, how heavy.
She would go out to the old well behind her house, a well that her grandfather had built decades earlier, and shout that information deep down into it.
In the echo that came back they said you could hear whispers from the other side, your loved ones grabbing and molding the shouted words, distorting them to say what they needed said.
You had to pay her in real gold, jewelry or bullion: it had to gleam.
She wished we could hear their voices as she did, how happy they are, how they miss us.
She said that everything that disappeared from our side went over to theirs, where they kept living normal lives, waiting for the things still lingering with us to join them, and make the world whole once more.
Scientists say that the brain chemistry of infatuation is akin to mental illness—which gives new meaning to - madly in love‘
My husband and I got married at eight in the morning.
It was winter, freezing, the trees encased in ice and a few lone blackbirds balancing on telephone wires.
We were in our early 30s, considered ourselves hip and cynical, the types who decried the institution of marriage even as we sought its status.
During our wedding brunch we put out a big suggestion box and asked people to slip us advice on how to avoid divorce; we thought it was a funny, clear-eyed, grounded sort of thing to do, although the suggestions were mostly foolish: Screw the toothpaste cap on tight.
After the guests left, the house got quiet.
There were flowers everywhere: puckered red roses and fragile ferns.
What can we do that‘s really romantic? I asked my newly wed one.
Benjamin suggested we take a bath.
I didn‘t want a bath.
He suggested a lunch of chilled white wine and salmon.
I was sick of salmon.
The wedding was over, the silence seemed suffocating, and I felt the familiar disappointment after a longed-for event has come and gone.
We were married.
Hip, hip, hooray.
