After taking several decades to come into widespread use, smart materials are now becoming an important tool in biomedicine and biotechnology.
Combining polymers with other functional chemistries can lead to an almost unlimited variety of smart materials.
In the near future, smart polymers will play a role in keeping track of changes in acidity in the kidneys to monitor homeostasis; taking their cue from enzymes in the blood vessels to repair embolisms; deploying biochemical compounds onsite to fix misshapen proteins in neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s; forming chemical and biochemical stimuli to regulate blood components such as glucose; and blocking chemical signals that can trigger melanoma.
Once a mere theoretical possibility, smart materials that respond to individual triggers like light and temperature are now a real possibility.
Such materials are of immense interest to scientists searching for new ways to treat disease and bypass the body’s cunning, but often counterproductive, defenses.
Alongside materials that respond to changes in temperature is another category of intriguing smart polymers whose changes are triggered instead by light.
Because light is a clean stimulus that allows remote control without physical contact, these photo-responsive polymers are useful for a wide variety of applications, including smart optical systems, micro-electrochemical systems, sensors, textiles, coatings, and solar cells.
One area receiving attention now is photo-responsive smart materials that change their color in response to light.
In our laboratory we are currently investigating a particular family of polymers that incorporate an organic compound called spiropyran.
This molecule has ring- shaped structures that open and close when exposed to certain wavelengths of light—or, in some cases, when exposed to changes in acidity.
Cleavage of the ring at the site of a specific carbon-oxygen bond creates a chromophore (color-producing region) that strongly absorbs visible light.
Like other smart materials discussed in the article, this polymer holds promise for biomedical application in the encapsulation and targeted release of drugs.
In a completely different application, the textile industry uses photo-responsive polymers woven into apparel to produce garments that change their color or reveal a print pattern in the sunlight, or fibers that act as an indicator of over-exposure to the sun—a feature that might be appreciated, for example, in children’s clothing.
Smart materials can be designed to conduct electrons in response to the absorption of electromagnetic radiation.
However, polymers are considered the next-generation material for photovoltaic devices because they are so inexpensive to manufacture.
Research is under way to improve the performance of polymer-based solar cells.
Ideally, the polymer models would respond to a broad range of light (infrared to visible wavelengths), increasing their efficiency to (for example) power electronic devices.
Working toward this goal, our group has an ongoing interest in developing materials known as paraphenylene oligomers.
Experimental and theoretical studies carried out in our group show that tagging those molecules with additional molecular groups causes the photo-responsive polymers to absorb longer, redder wavelengths of light.
These materials could be tuned to respond to an even broader range of light, we find, by adding a strong electron acceptor group.
Polymers containing transition metals such as ruthenium are particularly well suited as antennae for attracting light, a feature that facilitates its absorption and electron transfer (and/or energy transfer) within the material.
Our group, in collaboration with colleagues at the University of North Carolina.
Chapel Hill, has been using ruthenium in combination with a polymer to form a hybrid system (such as ruthenium (II) polypyridyl derivatized polystyrene) that looks particularly promising.
This line of investigation should yield a better understanding of how electron and photon energy are transported within the photo-responsive polymers.
Our latest studies suggest that the relative spatial arrangement between the ruthenium ions in the polymer is a key parameter influencing the way it transports electrons through the system.
Such discoveries are bringing us closer to developing polymer-based solar cells that can compete with coal- and natural gas–fired power plants.
Understanding the internal physics of light-absorbing polymers is essential to making further advances.
Although conventional, silicon-based photovoltaic arrays are already in widespread use, polymer- based solar devices would offer significant advantages.
Polymers are inexpensive to develop, easily scaled to large manufacturing quantities, lightweight, and adaptable to a wide variety of design criteria.
Refining and commercializing this technology would benefit not only the solar panel industry but also the textile industry, as it becomes possible to weave electron-conducting smart materials into fabrics.
In fact, the two industries may someday come to overlap.
Incorporating light-responsive smart materials into textiles could transform the way we interact with our electronics, perhaps leading ultimately to devices that can be charged by contact with our clothing.
What motivated Hatshepsut to rule ancient Egypt as a man while her stepson stood in the shadows?
Her mummy, and her true story, have come to light.
There was something strangely touching about her fingertips.
Her eye sockets were packed with blind black resin, her nostrils unbecomingly plugged with tight rolls of cloth.
Her left ear had sunk into the flesh on the side of her skull, and her head was almost completely without hair.
I leaned toward the open display case in Cairo's Egyptian Museum and gazed at what in all likelihood is the body of the female pharaoh Hatshepsut, the extraordinary woman who ruled Egypt from 1479 to 1458 B. C. and is famous today less for her reign during the golden age of Egypt's 18th dynasty than for having the audacity to portray herself as a man.
There was no beguiling myrrh perfume in the air, only some sharp and sour smell that seemed minted during the many centuries she had spent in a limestone cave.
It was hard to square this prostrate thing with the great ruler who lived so long ago and of whom it was written, To look upon her was more beautiful than anything.
The only human touch was in the bone shine of her nailless fingertips where the mummified flesh had shrunk back, creating the illusion of a manicure and evoking not just our primordial vanity but our tenuous intimacies, our brief and passing feel for the world.
The discovery of Hatshepsut's lost mummy made headlines two summers ago, but the full story unfolded slowly, in increments, a forensic drama more along the lines of CSI than Raiders of the Lost Ark.
Indeed the search for Hatshepsut showed the extent to which the trowels and brushes of archaeology's traditional toolbox have been supplemented by CT scanners and DNA gradient thermocyclers.
In 1903 the renowned archaeologist Howard Carter had found Hatshepsut's sarcophagus in the 20th tomb discovered in the Valley of the Kings—KV20.
The sarcophagus, one of three Hatshepsut had prepared, was empty.
Scholars did not know where her mummy was or whether it had even survived the campaign to eradicate the record of her rule during the reign of her co-regent and ultimate successor, Thutmose III, when almost all the images of her as king were systematically chiseled off temples, monuments, and obelisks.
The search that seems to have finally solved the mystery was launched in 2005 by Zahi Hawass, head of the Egyptian Mummy Project and secretary general of the Supreme Council of Antiquities.
Hawass and a team of scientists zeroed in on a mummy they called KV60a, which had been discovered more than a century earlier but wasn't thought significant enough to remove from the floor of a minor tomb in the Valley of the Kings.
KV60a had been cruising eternity without even the hospitality of a coffin, much less a retinue of figurines to perform royal chores.
She had nothing to wear, either—no headdress, no jewelry, no gold sandals or gold toe and finger coverings, none of the treasures that had been provided the pharaoh Tutankhamun, who was a pip-squeak of a king compared with Hatshepsut.
And even with all the high-tech methods used to crack one of Egypt's most notable missing person cases, if it had not been for the serendipitous discovery of a tooth, KV60a might still be lying alone in the dark, her royal name and status unacknowledged.
Today she is enshrined in one of the two Royal Mummy Rooms at the Egyptian Museum, with plaques in Arabic and English proclaiming her to be Hatshepsut, the King Herself, reunited at long last with her extended family of fellow New Kingdom pharaohs.
Given the oblivion that befell Hatshepsut, it's hard to think of a pharaoh whose hopes of being remembered are more poignant.
She seems to have been more afraid of anonymity than of death.
She was one of the greatest builders in one of the greatest Egyptian dynasties.
She raised and renovated temples and shrines from the Sinai to Nubia.
The four granite obelisks she erected at the vast temple of the great god Amun at Karnak were among the most magnificent ever constructed.
She commissioned hundreds of statues of herself and left accounts in stone of her lineage, her titles, her history, both real and concocted, even her thoughts and hopes, which at times she confided with uncommon candor.
Expressions of worry Hatshepsut inscribed on one of her obelisks at Karnak still resonate with an almost charming insecurity: Now my heart turns this way and that, as I think what the people will say.
Those who see my monuments in years to come, and who shall speak of what I have done.
Many uncertainties plague the early history of the New Kingdom, but it's clear that when Hatshepsut was born, Egyptian power was waxing.
Her possible grandfather Ahmose, founder of the 18th dynasty, had driven out the formidable Hyksos invaders who had occupied the northern part of the Nile Valley for two centuries.
When Ahmose's son Amenhotep I did not produce a son who lived to succeed him, a redoubtable general known as Thutmose is believed to have been brought into the royal line since he had married a princess.
Hatshepsut was the oldest daughter of Thutmose and his Great Royal Wife, Queen Ahmose, likely a close relative of King Ahmose.
But Thutmose also had a son by another queen, and this son, Thutmose II, inherited the crown when his father rested from life.
Adhering to a common method of fortifying the royal lineage—and with none of our modern-day qualms about sleeping with your sister—Thutmose II and Hatshepsut married.
They produced one daughter; a minor wife, Isis, would give Thutmose the male heir that Hatshepsut was unable to provide.
Thutmose II did not rule for long, and when he was ushered into the afterlife by what CT scans 3, 500 years later would suggest was heart disease, his heir, Thutmose III, was still a young boy.
In time-honored fashion, Hatshepsut assumed effective control as the young pharaoh's queen regent.
So began one of the most intriguing periods of ancient Egyptian history.
At first, Hatshepsut acted on her stepson's behalf, careful to respect the conventions under which previous queens had handled political affairs while juvenile offspring learned the ropes.
But before long, signs emerged that Hatshepsut's regency would be different.
Early reliefs show her performing kingly functions such as making offerings to the gods and ordering up obelisks from red granite quarries at Aswan.
After just a few years she had assumed the role of king of Egypt, supreme power in the land.
Her stepson—who by then may have been fully capable of assuming the throne—was relegated to second-in-command.
Hatshepsut proceeded to rule for a total of 21 years.
What induced Hatshepsut to break so radically with the traditional role of queen regent?
A social or military crisis?
Dynastic politics?
Divine injunctions from Amun?
A thirst for power?
There was something impelling Hatshepsut to change the way she portrayed herself on public monuments, but we don't know what it is, says Peter Dorman, a noted Egyptologist and president of the American University of Beirut.
One of the hardest things to guess is her motive.
On a cenotaph at the sandstone quarries of Gebel el Silsila, her chief steward and architect Senenmut refers to her as the king's firstborn daughter, a distinction that accents her lineage as the senior heir of Thutmose I rather than as the chief royal wife of Thutmose II.
Remember, Hatshepsut was a true blue blood, related to the pharaoh Ahmose, while her husband-brother was the offspring of an adopted king.
The Egyptians believed in the divinity of the pharaoh; only Hatshepsut, not her stepson, had a biological link to divine royalty.
Still, there was the small matter of gender.
The kingship was meant to be passed down from father to son, not daughter; religious belief dictated that the king's role could not be adequately carried out by a woman.
When her husband died, Hatshepsut's preferred title was not King's Wife, but God's Wife of Amun, a designation some believe paved her way to the throne.
In one seated red granite statue, Hatshepsut is shown with the unmistakable body of a woman but with the striped nemes headdress and uraeus cobra, symbols of a king.
In some temple reliefs, Hatshepsut is dressed in a traditional restrictive ankle-length gown but with her feet wide apart in the striding pose of the king.
As the years went on, she seems to have decided it was easier to sidestep the issue of gender altogether.
She had herself depicted solely as a male king, in the pharaoh's headdress, the pharaoh's shendyt kilt, and the pharaoh's false beard—without any female traits.
Many of her statues, images, and texts seem part of a carefully calibrated media campaign to bolster the legitimacy of her reign as king—and rationalize her transgression.
In reliefs at Hatshepsut's mortuary temple, she spun a fable of her accession as the fulfillment of a divine plan and declared that her father, Thutmose I, not only intended her to be king but also was able to attend her coronation.
In the panels the great god Amun is shown appearing before Hatshepsut's mother disguised as Thutmose I.
