I decided to take a walk.
I went into the center of town, pressed my nose against a bakery window, watched the man with flour on his hands, the dough as soft as skin, pushed and pulled and shaped at last into stars.
I milled about in an antique store.
At last I came to our town‘s tattoo parlor.
Now I am not a tattoo type person, but for some reason, on that cold silent Sunday, I decided to walk in.
Can I help you? a woman asked.
Is there a kind of tattoo I can get that won‘t be permanent? I asked.
Henna tattoos. she said.
She explained that they lasted for six weeks, were used at Indian weddings, were stark and beautiful and all brown.
She showed me pictures of Indian women with jewels in their noses, their arms scrolled and laced with the henna markings.
Indeed they were beautiful, sharing none of the gaudy comic strip quality of the tattoos we see in the United States.
These henna tattoos spoke of intricacy, of the webwork between two people, of ties that bind and how difficult it is to find their beginnings and their ends.
And because I had just gotten married, and because I was feeling a post wedding letdown, and because I wanted something really romantic to sail me through the night, I decided to get one.
Where? she asked.
She raised her eyebrows.
Sure. she said.
She came to me carrying a small black-bellied pot inside of which was a rich red mush, slightly glittering.
She turned my body into a stake supporting whole new gardens of growth, and then, low around my hips, she painted a delicate chain-linked chastity belt.
An hour later, the paint dry, I put my clothes back on, went home to find my newly wed one.
This, I knew, was my gift to him, the kind of present you offer only once in your lifetime.
I let him undress me.
Wow. he said, standing back.
We are no longer beginning, my husband and I.
This does not surprise me.
Even back then, wearing the decor of desire, the serpentining tattoos, I knew they would fade, their red-clay color bleaching out until they were gone.
On my wedding day I didn‘t care.
I do now.
Eight years later, pale as a pillowcase, here I sit, with all the extra pounds and baggage time brings.
And the questions have only grown more insistent.
Does passion necessarily diminish over time?
How reliable is romantic love, really, as a means of choosing one‘s mate?
Can a marriage be good when Eros is replaced with friendship, or even economic partnership, two people bound by bank accounts?
Let me be clear: I still love my husband.
There is no man I desire more.
But it‘s hard to sustain romance in the crumb-filled quotidian that has become our lives.
The ties that bind have been frayed by money and mortgages and children, those little imps who somehow manage to tighten the knot while weakening its actual fibers.
Benjamin and I have no time for chilled white wine and salmon.
The baths in our house always include Big Bird.
If this all sounds miserable, it isn‘t.
My marriage is like a piece of comfortable clothing; even the arguments have a feel of fuzziness to them, something so familiar it can only be called home.
And yet In the Western world we have for centuries concocted poems and stories and plays about the cycles of love, the way it morphs and changes over time, the way passion grabs us by our flung- back throats and then leaves us for something saner.
If Dracula—the frail woman, the sensuality of submission—reflects how we understand the passion of early romance, the Flintstones reflects our experiences of long-term love: All is gravel and somewhat silly, the song so familiar you can‘t stop singing it, and when you do, the emptiness is almost unbearable.
We have relied on stories to explain the complexities of love, tales of jealous gods and arrows.
Now, however, these stories—so much a part of every civilization—may be changing as science steps in to explain what we have always felt to be myth, to be magic.
For the first time, new research has begun to illuminate where love lies in the brain, the particulars of its chemical components.
A professor at Rutgers University, she lives in New York City, her book-lined apartment near Central Park, with its green trees fluffed out in the summer season, its paths crowded with couples holding hands.
Fisher has devoted much of her career to studying the biochemical pathways of love in all its manifestations: lust, romance, attachment, the way they wax and wane.
One leg casually crossed over the other, ice clinking in her glass, she speaks with appealing frankness, discussing the ups and downs of love the way most people talk about real estate.
A woman unconsciously uses orgasms as a way of deciding whether or not a man is good for her.
If he‘s impatient and rough, and she doesn‘t have the orgasm, she may instinctively feel he‘s less likely to be a good husband and father.
Scientists think the fickle female orgasm may have evolved to help women distinguish Mr. Right from Mr. Wrong.
One of Fisher‘s central pursuits in the past decade has been looking at love, quite literally, with the aid of an MRI machine.
Fisher and her colleagues Arthur Aron and Lucy Brown recruited subjects who had been ―madly in love‖ for an average of seven months.
Once inside the MRI machine, subjects were shown two photographs, one neutral, the other of their loved one.
What Fisher saw fascinated her.
When each subject looked at his or her loved one, the parts of the brain linked to reward and pleasure—the ventral tegmental area and the caudate nucleus—lit up.
What excited Fisher most was not so much finding a location, an address, for love as tracing its specific chemical pathways.
Love lights up the caudate nucleus because it is home to a dense spread of receptors for a neurotransmitter called dopamine, which Fisher came to think of as part of our own endogenous love potion.
In the right proportions, dopamine creates intense energy, exhilaration, focused attention, and motivation to win rewards.
It is why, when you are newly in love, you can stay up all night, watch the sun rise, run a race, ski fast down a slope ordinarily too steep for your skill.
Love makes you bold, makes you bright, makes you run real risks, which you sometimes survive, and sometimes you don‘t.
I first fell in love when I was only 12, with a teacher.
His name was Mr. McArthur, and he wore open-toed sandals and sported a beard.
I had never had a male teacher before, and I thought it terribly exotic.
Mr. McArthur did things no other teacher dared to do.
He smoked cigarettes at recess, leaning languidly against the side of the school building, the ash growing longer and longer until he casually tapped it off with his finger.
What unique constellation of needs led me to love a man who made an egg explode is interesting, perhaps, but not as interesting, for me, as my memory of love‘s sheer physical facts.
I had never felt anything like it before.
I could not get Mr. McArthur out of my mind.
I was anxious; I gnawed at the lining of my cheek until I tasted the tang of blood.
School became at once terrifying and exhilarating.
Would I see him in the hallway?
In the cafeteria?
I hoped.
But when my wishes were granted, and I got a glimpse of my man, it satisfied nothing; it only inflamed me all the more.
Had he looked at me?
Why had he not looked at me?
When would I see him again?
At home I looked him up in the phone book; I rang him, this in a time before caller ID.
He answered, Hello?
Pain in my heart, ripped down the middle.
Hang up.
Call back. Hello?
I never said a thing.
Once I called him at night, late, and from the way he answered the phone it was clear, even to a prepubescent like me, that he was with a woman.
His voice fuzzy, the tinkle of her laughter in the background.
I didn‘t get out of bed for a whole day.
Sound familiar?
Maybe you were 30 when it happened to you, or 8 or 80 or 25.
Maybe you lived in Kathmandu or Kentucky; age and geography are irrelevant.
Donatella Marazziti is a professor of psychiatry at the University of Pisa in Italy who has studied the biochemistry of lovesickness.
Having been in love twice herself and felt its awful power, Marazziti became interested in exploring the similarities between love and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
She and her colleagues measured serotonin levels in the blood of 24 subjects who had fallen in love within the past six months and obsessed about this love object for at least four hours every day.
Serotonin is, perhaps, our star neurotransmitter, altered by our star psychiatric medications: Prozac and Zoloft and Paxil, among others.
Researchers have long hypothesized that people with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) have a serotonin ―imbalance.
Drugs like Prozac seem to alleviate OCD by increasing the amount of this neurotransmitter available at the juncture between neurons.
Marazziti compared the lovers‘ serotonin levels with those of a group of people suffering from OCD and another group who were free from both passion and mental illness.
Levels of serotonin in both the obsessives‘ blood and the lovers‘ blood were 40 percent lower than those in her normal subjects.
Translation: Love and obsessive-compulsive disorder could have a similar chemical profile.
Translation: Love and mental illness may be difficult to tell apart.
Translation: Don‘t be a fool. Stay away.
Of course that‘s a mandate none of us can follow.
We do fall in love, sometimes over and over again, subjecting ourselves, each time, to a very sick state of mind.
There is hope, however, for those caught in the grip of runaway passion—Prozac.
There‘s nothing like that bicolored bullet for damping down the sex drive and making you feel ―blah‖ about the buffet.
Helen Fisher believes that the ingestion of drugs like Prozac jeopardizes one‘s ability to fall in love—and stay in love.
By dulling the keen edge of love and its associated libido, relationships go stale.
Says Fisher, I know of one couple on the edge of divorce. The wife was on an antidepressant.
Then she went off it, started having orgasms once more, felt the renewal of sexual attraction for her husband, and they‘re now in love all over again.
Psychoanalysts have concocted countless theories about why we fall in love with whom we do.
Freud would have said your choice is influenced by the unrequited wish to bed your mother, if you‘re a boy, or your father, if you‘re a girl.
Jung believed that passion is driven by some kind of collective unconscious.
Today psychiatrists such as Thomas Lewis from the University of California at San Francisco‘s School of Medicine hypothesize that romantic love is rooted in our earliest infantile experiences with intimacy, how we felt at the breast, our mother‘s face, these things of pure unconflicted comfort that get engraved in our brain and that we ceaselessly try to recapture as adults.
According to this theory we love whom we love not so much because of the future we hope to build but because of the past we hope to reclaim.
He or she is familiar. He or she has a certain look or smell or sound or touch that activates buried memories.
When I first met my husband, I believed this psychological theory was more or less correct.
My husband has red hair and a soft voice.
One day before we married he dunked a rose in liquid nitrogen so it froze, whereupon he flung it against the wall, spectacularly shattering it.
That‘s when I fell in love with him.
My father, too, has red hair, a soft voice, and many eccentricities.
He was prone to bursting into song, prompted by something we never saw.
However, it turns out my theories about why I came to love my husband may be just so much hogwash.
Evolutionary psychology has said good riddance to Freud and the Oedipal complex and all that other transcendent stuff and hello to simple survival skills.
It hypothesizes that we tend to see as attractive, and thereby choose as mates, people who look healthy.
And health, say these evolutionary psychologists, is manifested in a woman with a 70 percent waist-to-hip ratio and men with rugged features that suggest a strong supply of testosterone in their blood.
Waist-to-hip ratio is important for the successful birth of a baby and studies have shown this precise ratio signifies higher fertility.
As for the rugged look, well, a man with a good dose of testosterone probably also has a strong immune system and so is more likely to give his partner healthy children.
Perhaps our choice of mates is a simple matter of following our noses.
Claus Wedekind of the University of Lausanne in Switzerland did an interesting experiment with sweaty T-shirts.
He asked 49 women to smell T-shirts previously worn by unidentified men with a variety of the genotypes that influence both body odor and immune systems.
He then asked the women to rate which T-shirts smelled the best, which the worst.
What Wedekind found was that women preferred the scent of a T-shirt worn by a man whose genotype was most different from hers, a genotype that, perhaps, is linked to an immune system that possesses something hers does not.
In this way she increases the chance that her offspring will be robust.
It all seems too good to be true, that we are so hardwired and yet unconscious of the wiring.
Because no one to my knowledge has ever said, I married him because of his B. O.
We say, I married him (or her) because he‘s intelligent, she‘s beautiful, he‘s witty, she‘s compassionate.
But we may just be as deluded about love as we are when we‘re in love.
If it all comes down to a sniff test, then dogs definitely have the edge when it comes to choosing mates.
Why doesn‘t passionate love last?
How is it possible to see a person as beautiful on Monday, and 364 days later, on another Monday, to see that beauty as bland?
Surely the object of your affection could not have changed that much.
She still has the same shaped eyes.
Her voice has always had that husky sound, but now it grates on you—she sounds like she needs an antibiotic.
Or maybe you‘re the one who needs an antibiotic, because the partner you once loved and cherished and saw as though saturated with starlight now feels more like a low-level infection, tiring you, sapping all your strength.
Studies around the world confirm that, indeed, passion usually ends.
Its conclusion is as common as its initial flare.
No wonder some cultures think selecting a lifelong mate based on something so fleeting is folly.
Helen Fisher has suggested that relationships frequently break up after four years because that‘s about how long it takes to raise a child through infancy.
Passion, that wild, prismatic insane feeling, turns out to be practical after all.
We not only need to copulate; we also need enough passion to start breeding, and then feelings of attachment take over as the partners bond to raise a helpless human infant.
Once a baby is no longer nursing, the child can be left with sister, aunts, friends.
Each parent is now free to meet another mate and have more children.
Biologically speaking, the reasons romantic love fades may be found in the way our brains respond to the surge and pulse of dopamine that accompanies passion and makes us fly.
Cocaine users describe the phenomenon of tolerance: The brain adapts to the excessive input of the drug.
Perhaps the neurons become desensitized and need more and more to produce the high—to put out pixie dust, metaphorically speaking.
Maybe it‘s a good thing that romance fizzles.
Would we have railroads, bridges, planes, faxes, vaccines, and television if we were all always besotted?
In place of the ever evolving technology that has marked human culture from its earliest tool use, we would have instead only bonbons, bouquets, and birth control.
More seriously, if the chemically altered state induced by romantic love is akin to a mental illness or a drug-induced euphoria, exposing yourself for too long could result in psychological damage.
A good sex life can be as strong as Gorilla Glue, but who wants that stuff on your skin?
Once upon a time, in India, a boy and a girl fell in love without their parents‘ permission.
They were from different castes, their relationship radical and unsanctioned.
Picture it: the sparkling sari, the boy in white linen, the clandestine meetings on tiled terraces with a fat, white moon floating overhead.
Who could deny these lovers their pleasure, or condemn the force of their attraction?
Their parents could.
In one recent incident a boy and girl from different castes were hanged at the hands of their parents as hundreds of villagers watched.
A couple who eloped were stripped and beaten.
Yet another couple committed suicide after their parents forbade them to marry.
Anthropologists used to think that romance was a Western construct, a bourgeois by-product of the Middle Ages.
Romance was for the sophisticated, took place in cafés, with coffees and Cabernets, or on silk sheets, or in rooms with a flickering fire.
It was assumed that non-Westerners, with their broad familial and social obligations, were spread too thin for particular passions.
How could a collectivist culture celebrate or in any way sanction the obsession with one individual that defines new love?
