"It’s kind of lonely, though.”
"At least you have me.”
"I guess so,” she said.
"That’s better than nothing.”
I tackled her to the ground and we spent the next ten minutes hitting each other with stuffed animals.
My sister always dies before the world ends.
The sky is marred with the scars of my efforts, and I am so, so tired.
The storm hums in my veins, one more cycle in many.
I can’t count them anymore, numbers constantly in flux, ticking higher with each potential breath.
I wonder if this is what Melanie felt like every day of her life, so ripe with power, always at the precipice, always afraid to push in fear of making things worse.
This time around, I’m on the floor of my apartment, staring at my cell phone in my hand.
My roommate is out and I’ve already missed my flight home.
I let it pass, money evaporating into the void, meaningless.
Somewhere in the southwest, Melanie is walking out of the house, or is about to, her heart roaring with wildfire, lonely, alone.
The sparks dance purple in her hands, lightning like veins through her arms.
You can’t fix this.
It was never yours to control.
But my hands fumble over the touch screen, thumbs sliding wet over her face on the contact screen.
She’s programmed in the same stupid anime ringtone I have on my phone, and it jingles inanely, all synthetic voices and pre-ordained sound.
I wait, mouth dry, my body shaking like the sky above the Mojave before it rains.
Painted in brilliant, feverish strokes in my head, the daisy chain grows.
CIVILIZATION is the state of man.
Man of all creatures is destined by the laws of his very nature to scale the heights according to his capacities for vision.
His life is spent in seeking relations to the outside world.
Living – being, adapting, becoming – is a process wherein man"s inherent forces meet effectively the challenging forces of the outside world.
Living becomes a series of conflicts in man"s striving toward a goal.
But there is conflict not only between man and his world, but within man himself – between the instinctive demands of the various powers of his complex nature.
How much simpler human life would be if man"s relations to his world and himself were like those in the plant or animal order, where relations are fixed and realized by an instinctive functioning of the creature"s nature!
But this solution of man"s problems calls for powers of a higher order, demanding knowledge of himself.
He must understand and know himself as an animal, as a man, as an individual, as an artist, and as a member of society.
His primary nature will be understood as the plane where instinctive impulses operate.
The impulses are powerful tendencies to action: they are the springs of future conduct.
They are forces that need to be trained to serve the will and desires of an intellect impelled by ideals, so that man can bring all his powers to bear upon the life of his choice.
Finding peace within ourselves and bringing about an adequate adjustment to his life around us are the bases of all mental and physical activity.
All living is a process of solving problems as we become aware of them.
Problem-solving is the basis of creative activity and is essential to all walks of life – work, play, and art.
Any work of art begins with a purpose and grows through technique.
In dance, as in every art, it is essential to train the mind to use some tool as an instrument with which to mold a medium into an art form.
In dance the body is employed as the instrument, and movement as the medium.
Consequently, a dancer has two goals to keep in view.
First, he must train the mind to use the body to reflect its conditions, for the primary concern of dance is the feeling tones of physical origin.
Second, he must train the body to be responsive to the expressive mind.
Whatever thought and feeling tones are to be expresses must be felt through the body.
Therefore the importance of feelings and emotions, and their power to motivate muscle activity, cannot be overlooked.
Muscles contract in proportion to the intensity of the emotional drive of the experience to be expressed.
This inner force, or motive power that drives us on in the life of our choosing, resides in that complex center which perceives, thinks, reasons, comprehends, remembers, imagines, and creates – the center we call mind.
Contemporary education regards the individual as a growing, changing organism whose mind becomes increasingly his most distinctive and dominant characteristic.
The word mind is an abstract term.
Every mind is unique organization of impressions, intuitions, and beliefs which interprets all of experience.
The reactions of one mind will be different from those of a mind that has differently organized impressions.
Every sensed impression takes its particular direction.
Either it is arrested by counterimpressions, or it blends with past impressions and forms a definite feeling or attitude.
Power of mind may be said to be the degree of strength of the stimulative and regulative processes which follow upon the perception of a stimulus.
Therefore, experiences that have not been sufficiently perceived will contribute little or nothing toward expression.
What has not impresses cannot be expressed.
A properly functioning mind is constantly receiving impressions, associating them, refining them, selecting and releasing them, and do transforming them that they may better serve its purpose.
The process whereby man gathers unto himself experience and performs acts manifesting sensation, choice, and volition, is accomplished through the nervous system by means of its stimulus-response mechanism.
To achieve these integrated responses it employs special tools.
First of all there are those sense organs, or receiving organs (receptors), that pick up information from the outside world.
They are terminal sensory structures adapted to receive various forms of environmental stimuli and to transmit them to the brain in the form of nerve impulses.
Because of them we are able to "tune in” on all life"s activities around us.
These receptors are the only media through which the forces of the world outside or the generating forces within the body can reach the central nervous system and bring it into activity.
In this sense, the receptors may be thought of as analyzers of our environment, splitting it up into its component parts, each particular receptor attuned to certain aspects of the external environment and the mileu intérieur.
*A term here used for convenience to designate the mental aspect of the total organism, and not to imply a separation of mind from body.
Besides the usually mentioned five senses, there are organs of other senses – responsive only to conditions within the body itself.
The group of sense organs that are of special interest in the study of movement are those in the muscles, joints, and tendons.
They are stimulated by the activity of these parts, reporting to the mind the exact state of muscular contraction, the range of joint movement.
It is by means of this movement sense – the kinaesthetic sense – that we can judge, the timing, force, and extent of our movement, and adjust ourselves consciously or automatically to this information.
To this group of receptors also belong the organs of static and equilibratory sensations, which serve to maintain body balance and posture.
The receptors, then, bring, as grist to the mill, a great mass of sensory material.
The task of executing a reaction to this sensory material belongs to the effectors, which are the organs of response.
Just as the receptors are specialized agents receiving stimuli, the effectors are specialized discharging agents.
Between these lies a conducting tissue, serving an associative function as well as carrying impulses in and out.
It also provides infinite possibilities for correlative action.
With such an arrangement for association and overlapping of impulses, we can at once appreciate how infinite and vast are the possibilities of the mind, and can theorize that there are perceptual areas of the brain awaiting further sensitization to forms of energy pervading the ether, of which, as yet, man remains unaware.
Before an effective motor response is made, the great mass of incoming material undergoes a profound change.
It becomes organized into definite ideas about, or images of, the environment upon which energy is expended.
This change takes place in the cerebral cortex, where residues of past impressions are retained and where selective correlations and associations of great complexity take place.
There emerge new behaviour patterns in thought as well as in action.
As the incoming impulses course toward the discriminating and organizing centers of cortex, they are first delayed at a subcortical relay station, the thalamus.
The reflex activity of the thalamus does not attain distinct consciousness, but nevertheless it contributes a feeling tone to the awareness ultimately aroused.
The thalamus is often spoken of as the "old brain.
”It is important in lower forms without a cortex, and in man it retains its primitive functions.
It is because of this contribution of the "old brain” that stimulation is directly connected with feeling tones, but it is the associative influences of the cortex that contribute toward enhancing their active manifestations.
The cortex has a controlling or inhabiting influence over all the lower centers.
If path from the thalamus to the cortex is cut, there results excessive response to affective stimuli.
There is an overloading of sensation with feeling tone because the regulating influence of the cortex has been released.
This type of behaviour is normally that of the immature mind, whether in a child, in primitive man, or in an immature adult.
It seems that within this "old brain” resides the stored-up wisdom of the race – residues of racial experience that have helped man to survive and that are, therefore, rich in emotional tone.
Indeed, the affective phase of sensations and the emotional life in general are believed to reside in this "old brain” and not in the cerebral cortex.
The sensations, however, are without clear localization and discrimination.
These need the co-operation of the cortex.
The thalamus and the spinal cord take care of all impulses of the instinctive type without reference to the cortex, but they are not free of its inhibiting influence.
Another subcortical area that has profound influence upon all movement is the cerebellum.
It does not initiate movement, but in some way it affects the tonicity of the muscles and diminishes the tonus of the antagonist muscles.
It maintains proper balance of muscular contractions.
The details of its functional activity, although appreciated, are not clearly understood.
But it is certain that the cerebellum is the mechanism of unconscious motor coordination and is devoted chiefly to reflex and instinctive activities.
Medical science has discovered that loss of tonicity, due to the impaired functioning of the cerebellum, results in increases mobility of the joints.
Intelligence and consciousness (the psyche) are believed to reside within the gray matter of the cerebrum.
Correlations and associations of great complexity take place within it.
It also possesses the ability to retain past impressions.
It is so constructed that every part not only receives incoming impulses but originates outgoing impulses as well.
Impulses that involve association, selection, and discrimination are referred to the cortex for these processes before being passed on to the effectors for execution.
