As persuasive as their case may be, even the most ardent Oxfordians must admit there isn’t a scrap of real evidence tying their man to Shakespeare’s work.
And how to explain Ben And art alive still, while thy Booke doth live, /And we have wits to read, and praise to give.
By and large, orthodox Stratfordians – a group that includes the vast majority of historians and English professors with an interest in Shakespeare – dismiss Oxford’s champions as wishful thinkers who ignore or misread historical evidence.
It’s natural, they say, that we yearn for traces of our most revered writer – a signed love sonnet on parchment, at least, if not a complete first draft of Macbeth.
But finding their absence suspicious, they say, reveals basic misunderstandings about life during the English Renaissance.
In his own time, Shakespeare wasn’t thought of as a universal genius,” says Marjorie Garber, professor of English and visual studies at Harvard University and the author of several books on Shakespeare, including Shakespeare After All (2004).
Nobody was about to save a laundry list he wrote so they could sell it on eBay.
It wasn’t that kind of culture. Paper, typically handmade in France, was scarce and expensive; when it was no longer needed, it was reused – to line a baking dish, perhaps, or stiffen a book cover.
Letter- writing and diary-keeping were unusual, especially for commoners.
As for play manuscripts, Garber says, Once they were set in type, there was certainly no reason to save them.
Even in print, plays were considered something less than literature.
When Thomas Bodley set up the Bodleian library at Oxford University in Shakespeare’s time, she points out, he refused to include play texts.
These were considered trash, like pulp fiction.”
One by one, mainstream scholars knock down the Oxfordians’ debating points.
No, Stratford wasn’t an uncultured backwater; a lord mayor of London and an archbishop of Canterbury had both come from there.
No, a Stratford grammar-school graduate wasn’t akin to a seventh-grade dropout of today.
The Greek and Latin classics echoed in the plays were a standard part of the grammar-school curriculum.
Shakespeare may never have visited Italy, but neither he nor anyone else during the Renaissance ever set foot in ancient Greece or Rome either, and that did not rule out the Classical world as a popular setting for poetry and drama.
And no, you didn’t have to be a nobleman to write about kings and queens.
Writers of every stripe did so – it’s what the Elizabethan public demanded.
In the end, what sets Shakespeare apart from his contemporaries is the sheer range of his style and his subject matter, says the University of Warwick’s Jonathan Bate.
He was great in comedy and tragedy and history.
He could write about the court, and he could write about ordinary people.
A play doesn’t have to be autobiographical, Bate suggests, any more than a sonnet has to be confessional.
Shakespeare always kept himself well disguised. He didn’t insert his own opinions, and he steered away from the topical controversies of the day.
That’s why it’s so easy for directors and filmmakers today to make his plays contemporary.
It’s the key to his endurance.
Nor, Bate adds, is it necessary to believe that Shakespeare began writing masterpieces as soon as he picked up a quill.
There is good evidence that he started by rewriting the works of other dramatists.
Lots of his early plays are either collaborative works, where he’s a kind of junior partner working with more established dramatists, or they’re reworkings of older plays.
”Even the mature plays like Hamlet and King Lear, Bate says, drew on existing works for their plots.
In his time, originality wasn’t especially valued.
As for England not mourning his death, that’s not surprising either.
By 1616, Shakespeare was, after all, a middle-class retiree living far from London, and his plays were no longer the latest fashion.
In his own lifetime and for some time after, Shakespeare is certainly admired and respected, but he’s not thought of as unique,” says Bate.
Which is why later writers felt justified in improving” on him.
British poet laureate John Dryden shortened Troilus and Cressida in the late 1600s by excising what he called that heap of Rubbish, under which so many excellent Thoughts lay wholly bury’d.”
An unnamed critic in the following century scolded Shakespeare for ignoring the ancients, for violating decorum by resorting to tragicomedy and supernatural characters, and for using puns and blank verse.
The idea that he was a completely different order of genius from all his contemporaries only begins in the mid-18th century, with the British Empire taking off and literacy growing,” says Bate.
The apotheosis became official with actor David Garrick’s lavish Shakespeare Jubilee, held in Stratford in 1769.
For today’s public, of course, Shakespeare is to literary genius what Mozart is to music and Leonardo to painting.
The authorship debate, says Bate, is a natural consequence of a cult of Shakespeare now deeply rooted in our culture.
Harvard’s Marjorie Garber takes an unusually tolerant view of the long-running dispute.
A lot of people, especially writers, prefer the mystery to an answer,” she says.
Any answer is going to be simply a human of a particular time and place.
We regard Shakespeare today, she believes, the way his friend Ben Jonson did in his First Folio tribute – He was not of an age, but for all time! ”– and asks whether we really want to see him reduced to an ordinary mortal.
Garber likes to cite a remark Charles Dickens made to a friend in 1847: The life of Shakespeare is a fine mystery, and I tremble every day lest something should turn up.”
Whenever I am tempted to blame God, I remember a period of great frustration I went through several years ago, and what I learned from it.
It all began on the way home from a fishing trip in upstate New York – a welcome chance to escape the pressures of my work for a few days – when I noticed that I was losing my voice.
At first I ignored it, expecting it to improve within several days.
But it only grew worse.
Finally my doctor referred me to a specialist.
The diagnosis: a paralyzed vocal chord.
The specialist reassured me that my voice would eventually recover, but weeks and then months went by, and there was no change.
His prescription was complete voice rest (I wasn’t even allowed to whisper) and frustrating as it was, I held to it religiously.
Still there was no improvement.
I wondered if I would ever speak again.
To make things worse, right during this time my congregation became embroiled in an extended crisis involving a fallout between several longstanding members.
At meeting after meeting I was asked for my input as senior pastor, but instead of being able to respond, I could only sit by in silence and write down the things I most wanted to say.
When a capability like speech – or anything else we take for granted – is taken away from us, we can choose to see it with new appreciation, as the gift it is.
But I was too anxious and upset to do that.
To be honest, I was angry.
Even if God was testing me, I said to myself, he couldn’t have picked a worse time.
It was only with time that I was able to see the whole annoying predicament from another angle: I began to real-ize that it was providing me with an important chance to develop a more flexible outlook on life, to take myself less seriously, and to make the best of an imperfect situation.
Three months later, my voice began to return; now, seven years later, it is back to normal.
But I have never forgotten those twelve weeks.
Andrea, a woman in my church, struggled to accept a much heavier burden: she miscarried three times before having a healthy child.
Unlike mine, Andrea’s story is not, strictly speaking, about blaming or "forgiving” God.
For her the battle was to accept the loss of her babies without succumbing to the fear that God was somehow trying to punish her.
But in showing how she was able to wrestle through her emotions and find peace, it illustrates a similar theme.
Neil and I were delighted to find that I was pregnant after only six months of marriage.
But one night, just before Christmas, I felt intense pain that grew rapidly worse.
Our doctor wanted to send me to the hospital, and our neighbor, a nurse, came to stay with me until we left for town.
She confirmed my worst fears – I would probably lose my baby.
The emotional pain was at least as severe as the physical.
Why, God?
Why me?
Why do you have to take away this tiny soul so soon?
What have I done wrong?
In order to save my life, an operation was necessary.
The baby was lost, and I spent weeks recuperating.
We agonized over our loss and felt alone in our pain.
When one of our relatives said to us, "Cheer up!
Maybe you’ll have better luck next time,” I felt like I had been slapped in the face.
Luck?
We had just lost a baby, a real person, a child!
Someone sent me a card that said, "The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lord.”
That made me really upset.
How could I thank God for this horrible, painful experience?
I couldn’t.
And I couldn’t stop thinking that somehow God was punishing me, even though I couldn’t understand why.
Our pastor consoled me: God is a God of love, not of punishment, and he is there to ease our pain.
I grasped at his words as a drowning person grabs onto a pole held out from the shore.
Neil’s loving support seemed like a visible sign of this love, and we discovered that our pain united us in a new way.
The words "Weeping shall endure for the night, but joy comes in the morning” especially comforted me, even when I couldn’t feel that joy coming, when it seemed that dawn would never break.
Slowly, with time and with the loving help of those around me, I was able to feel that this deeply painful experience had given me an inkling of the love of God, who cares about the suffering of people and who was, I am convinced, right there beside me in my pain.
God became more real to me, and I began to trust his love.
But then, some months later, when I was expecting another baby and hoping fervently that all would go well, the same thing happened again.
Severe pain, an emergency trip to the hospital, and an operation to save my life.
Again another precious little person lost just after it had come into being.
Deep pain tore my heart apart.
I wrote in my diary: "I cannot see why; perhaps I never will.
I need the assurance of faith – Help me!"
Neil stood faithfully beside me.
He had lost a sister to cancer some years before, and what he had written then was a great source of sustenance: "We are separated from God only in physical distance, and that distance is perhaps not great."
I hung on to that with all my strength.
Slowly, over weeks and months, the pain of loss lessened, although it has never departed entirely.
About a year later I again lost an unborn child.
Once more there was deep pain in my heart, but this time no desperation over why.
Today Andrea is the mother of a beautiful six-year-old daughter.
Although thinking about her first three pregnancies always brings back a flood of emotions, she is not bitter.
In fact, she is even able to point to two good fruits of her anguish: a greater love for her husband, who "went to hell and back with me, ” and endless gratitude for her only child.
Like Andrea, Jon and Gretchen Rhoads – a young couple in a nearby community – eagerly awaited the birth of their first child.
Alan was born after a seemingly normal pregnancy, and in the beginning everything seemed all right.
After he was discharged from the hospital, though, his parents noticed something was wrong.
Alan didn’t eat well.
His muscle tone was poor.
He lay very still, almost without moving, and when he breathed, he occasionally made strange gurgling sounds.
Alan was quickly admitted to a nearby university hospital, but he was three months old before his problems became clear: he would probably never walk or talk; he was blind; and he had significant abnormalities of the hips, brain, ears, and stomach.
Jon and Gretchen were devastated.
They had long suspected that something was wrong, but they hadn’t expected it to be this bad.
Right away they began to accuse themselves, and it wasn’t long before they began to accuse God: Why us?
Jon says that though he was angry, he could never real--ly say at whom.
Himself?
Gretchen?
Alan’s doctors?
God?
Yes, perhaps God, but he couldn’t explain why.
Still, he refused to become bitter, but concluded instead that "either God does not love us, or this is just how Alan is meant to be.
We may never know why, but if we are resentful about Alan’s condition, we will kill any joy we have had in him."
Both Jon and Gretchen admit that acceptance is easier to talk about, than to actually practice.
There have been plenty of times when they wanted to run away from it all, when they simply couldn’t face another visitor offering meaningless words of sympathy.
And while some days bring progress and new hope, others bring setbacks and trials.
In his first year alone Alan had a tracheotomy and numerous other surgeries, including an appendectomy.
How much more suffering will he have to endure?
In a world quick to offer "early diagnosis” and abortion as the answer to imperfect babies, Alan’s parents refuse to see their child as a burden.
"He has a great deal to tell us,” Gretchen wrote when he was almost one, "and we are not about to let him go."
His small hand reaches up through a tangle of wires to find my cheek.
As I stoop to lift him from his bed, his eyelids lift slightly and he gives me a sleepy grin…
In the eleven months since his birth, Alan has been hospitalized five times; we have long since stopped counting the outpatient appointments.
Each time we come home with more questions and fewer answers; more tears, and less certainty.
But as he snuggles against me and looks around curiously, he grins.
His smile is a balm to my heart.
How much more pain can Alan bear?
What new hurdles await us?
His tracheostomy has taken away the few small adventures we had looked forward to: bottles and the chance to explore solid food.
No more gurgles of joy, either, and no more cries of frustration.
If he lives, the doctor tells us, he may outgrow the need for these tubes.
He is teaching me acceptance every day.
In the end, it is this acceptance Gretchen writes of that allows us to "forgive” God.
Without it, we are left rebelling against our lot in life, and fighting every cross we feel unjustly forced to bear.
With it, we gain the ability to see our hardships in relation to the suffering of others, and strength to carry them.
Without being forgiven, released from the consequences of what we have done, our capacity to act would, as it were, be confined to a single deed from which we could never recover; we would remain the victims of its consequences forever, not unlike the sorcerer’s apprentice who lacked the magic formula to break the spell.
When we assure a person who has hurt us that we no longer hold anything against him, all he has to do is accept our kindness – at least that is what we might hope.
But that is often more easily said than done.
For many people, the problem of guilt cannot be solved with another’s forgiveness, or by any external means at all.
For them, peace of mind comes only when they are able to forgive themselves.
I first met Delf Fransham in 1953.
That was the year he moved from the United States to the remote South American village where I grew up and began to teach at the local school.
There were eleven of us in his class, all boys, and all ruffians, and a few days into his first term we decided to put him to the test.
One typical Paraguayan morning (humid and around 110 degrees), we offered to take him on a hike.
Officially, we wanted to show him the sights.
Privately, we wanted to see what he was made of.
After leading him at least ten kilometers through jungle, prairie, and swampland, we finally turned back.
Shortly after we arrived home he collapsed with heat stroke.
Delf was in bed for days, but we hardly gave it a thought.
We had achieved exactly what we wanted – proved him a sissy.
But we were in for a small surprise.
The day he came back to school he said, "Boys, let’s try that hike again."
We couldn’t believe it!
We covered the same route again and, sure enough, this time he did not succumb to the heat.
Delf won our respect and our hearts that day, and we trusted him from then on.
(There was something else to it, too: a talented athlete, he taught us soccer and loved to play with us. )
Decades later, and only by chance, I found out why Delf had poured so much love and energy into reaching his students.
He had lost a child of his own.
Nicholas was born when the Franshams were still living in the United States, and one day as Delf was backing a truckload of firewood into their driveway, two-year-old Nicholas, who was playing outdoors, ran to meet his father.
Delf did not see him until it was too late, and ran over him.
Katie, Delf’s wife, was busy inside the house when he carried in their little boy, limp in his arms.
She remembers: I was beside myself – absolutely frantic – but Delf steadied me.
We took Nicholas to our doctor, who was also the coroner, and explained what had happened…
There was never any question about forgiving my husband, as I knew I was just as much to blame.
Likewise he did not blame me, only himself.
We stood in our sorrow together.
Delf, however, could not forgive himself, and the accident haunted him for years.
From then on, he went out of his way to make time for children – time he could not spend with the son he had killed.
Looking back, I remember how his eyes often glistened with tears, and wonder what it was that made them come.
Was it that he saw his son in us?
Was he imagining the boy his toddler would never become?
Whatever the reason, it seems that Delf’s determination to show love to others was his way of making up for the anguish he had caused himself and his family by unintentionally taking a life.
John Plummer lives the quiet life of a Methodist pastor in a sleepy Virginia town these days, but things weren’t always so.
A helicopter pilot during the Vietnam War, he helped organize a napalm raid on the village of Trang Bang in 1972 – a bombing immortalized by the prize-winning photograph of one of its victims, Phan Thi Kim Phuc.
For the next twenty-four years, John was haunted by the photograph – an image that for many people captured the essence of the war: a naked and burned nine-year-old running toward the camera, with plumes of black smoke billowing in the sky behind her.
For twenty-four years John’s conscience tormented him.
He badly wanted to find the girl to tell her that he was sorry – but he could not.
Turning in on himself, he grew more and more depressed (the collapse of two marriages didn’t help), and he began to drink.
Then, in an almost unbelievable coincidence, John met Kim during an event at the Vietnam War Memorial on Veterans Day, 1996.
Kim had come to Washington, D. C. , to lay a wreath for peace; John had come with a group of former pilots unable to come to terms with their shared past, but determined to stick together anyway.
In a speech to the crowd, Kim introduced herself as the girl in the famous photograph.
She still suffered immensely from her burns, she said, but she was not bitter, and she wanted people to know that others had suffered even more than she had: "Behind that picture of me, thousands and thousands of people…died.
They lost parts of their bodies.
Their whole lives were destroyed, and nobody took their picture."
Kim went on to say that although she could not change the past, she had forgiven the men who had bombed her village, and that she felt a calling to promote peace by fostering goodwill between America and Vietnam.
