Since Juraj's parents were not communists he could not get into art school in Czechoslovakia; instead, he got a place in Krakow.
In 1975 he was invited by a family to visit the United States.
It was always possible, he said, to get an exit visa, even though very few did.
He loved New York.
By this time he was studying at the Academy of Fine Arts in Bratislava, and, on his return he was expelled, told that he would have an imperialist influence on his fellow- students.
The official reason was given as 'a sudden loss of talent'.
Even though he now views the election of Pope John Paul II as vitally important, in 1978 he viewed it merely as a big event for Poland.
The relationship between Prague and Bratislava remained the same throughout this period.
For everything important you had to go to Prague; Slovakia was for lakes and rivers and mountains.
Slovakia was a poor primitive country; the industry and the wealth were in the hands of the Czechs.
There were no embassies in Bratislava, and none of the connections to the outside world which the western embassies in Prague offered to dissidents.
While there were a thousand Czech signatories to Charter 77, only fifty Slovaks signed.
But there was a dissident movement within Slovakia, he said, operating through the Church and the environmental movement, rather than Charter 77 or foreign channels.
In 1983 Juraj was permitted to make and sell flower-pots; in the looser atmosphere of the Gorbachev years he began to export ceramics to Austria, and this business grew throughout the 198os.
In 1989 he went to the United States once more, but this time was disappointed.
In his subsequent book about the Velvet Revolution, Velvet Failures, he wrote: 'During this stay in the US I totally lost my illusions about this paradise on earth.
I stayed with various people, particularly among the "lower class".
I could not believe how hard the life was for some Americans.
The driver on the New York bus line who worked ten hours a day could not afford to pay health insurance, let alone for a private flat in Manhattan.
I was told that more than twenty per cent of Americans couldn't afford health insurance.
I met an emigrant from Slovakia who worked as a shop assistant.
In a pub fight he lost his front teeth, and because of this ugly hole in his mouth he lost his job next day.
He didn't have the money to pay his dentist so he also couldn't pay his rent either and eventually became homeless.'
The first open demonstration in Slovakia against the regime was organised through the Catholic Church.
It took place on 25 March 1988.
People were asked to walk out of the churches and gather in one of the city's squares to ask for civil and religious freedom.
They were asked to carry lighted candles and remain silent.
The atmosphere was scary, Juraj said.
The police surrounded the square, they had water cannon and police dogs, but nothing happened.
In November the following year he was driving back to Bratislava when he heard the news that the Velvet Revolution had begun.
In Bratislava old friends of his, artists and actors, became the leaders of the revolution, and formed political parties m the new democracy.
At the beginning, Juraj said, Vaclav Havel was loved by everybody, and the problems between the two parts of Czechoslovakia did not surface.
As he wrote: 'Before 1989I did not have any strong feelings of nationality.
I literally hated Slovak folklore, since it had always been supported by communists to the detriment of modern world culture, which was forbidden.
I did not feel myself to be either Slovak or Czechoslovak. The only place I felt I belonged was Bratislava."
In the days after the revolution there was talk that the capital of the federation should be in Brno, which is halfway between Prague and Bratislava.
But there was a real sense that the Czechs did not understand Slovak sensitivities.
The idea, Juraj said, that there was no time for such matters now, that the establishment of a market economy must come first, was quite shocking for him.
He had been sure that Havel would understand the problem, that it could not continue under democracy as it had under communism.
After the revolution Juraj became a member of the Co-ordinating Committee of the Revolution, a twelve member body.
He spoke better English than the rest and worked on international relations.
In February 1990 he became acutely conscious that there were going to be serious difficulties between Havel and the Slovaks.
Havel had organised a trip to Washington and other North American capitals.
The delegation consisted of two hundred and ten people, the second biggest foreign delegation to Washington in history (the biggest was headed by de Gaulle).
Originally, there were to be eight Slovaks, but the new government rang from Prague and reduced the number to four, and then put it back to eight when there were protests.
This was followed by a trip to Israel. No Slovak politician was included; the two Slovaks in the delegation were representatives of the Jewish community.
For Juraj, it was vital that a Slovak politician be present to apologise for what happened to the Jews in Slovakia during the war, and to make clear that the new Slovakia harboured no anti-Semitic feelings.
In the end the actor Milan Knazko, a close friend of Juraj's and a leader of the revolution in Bratislava, went and made a speech.
Milan Knazko's story,' Juraj wrote in his book, 'as Havel's Slovak adviser at the Prague Castle speaks for itself.
He accepted the post with the original intention that he would later become a vice-president - a step that Slovakia would have welcomed, but it never came about.
The opposite happened, since Knazko often disagreed with Havel and his team and strongly fought for Slovak interests. After several weeks in the Castle he lost direct access to the President and sometimes found himself waiting for days before Havel would agree to meet him.
There were ten million Czechs and five million Slovaks; the ruling class in Bratislava came to feel throughout 1990 that they were being treated as nice peasants who lived in the mountains, who did not know enough to be part of the great velvet future, whose education out of their fascism and their Catholicism would take a long time.
Prague was not even aware that there was a festering Slovak problem, as there was no Slovak newspaper available in Prague and no Slovak politician close to Havel.
Slovak emigrants in the United States pointed out that as far as the western media were concerned, Slovakia did not exist.
In Prague, members of the old communist ruling class were slowly returning to positions of power, but in Bratislava, no one in the VPN (People Against Violence) had any political experience.
Juraj wrote: 'Our ideas about the world of politics, diplomacy and security were based on adventure novels rather than experience or logic.
I remember my naivety when I agreed to go to the US embassy in Vienna, contact the CIA there and ask them to come to the VPN headquarters to check whether the building was bugged.
They couldn't believe their ears when I asked them to put me in touch with the secret service and said there were no such people there.
Eventually, a man responsible for security matters did see me.
He might have been from the CIA but could naturally never say so.
He gave me an address of an Austrian firm that provided this service, warned me it was expensive and saw me out the door.'
In the spring of 1990 discussion began over the name of the federation and whether there should be a dash between Czech and Slovak.
Various Czech politicians openly made fun of the Slovaks and said that the dash could be used in Bratislava but not abroad.
Slovaks, in turn, suggested that their state should be mentioned first, as in Slovakoczech.
In Prague, this was viewed as a joke.
Still, throughout 1990 Juraj believed that the federation could be preserved and he wanted to remain a citizen of Czechoslovakia, whether it had a dash or not.
But early in 1991 he began to change his mind.
On 14 March a demonstration was organised in Bratislava to commemorate the setting up of the Slovak state in 1939.
Between two and three thousand people attended, which was tiny compared to the huge demonstrations which had taken place at the time of the revolution when more than a hundred thousand people would turn up.
There were two thousand wild Slovaks, Juraj remembered, a mixture of fascists, communists, anti-Semites and nationalists.
For them, Vaclav Havel was the real enemy.
Juraj noticed that there was a surprising number of foreign journalists and camera crews covering this demonstration and then he understood.
Without informing the Slovak minister for the interior, 'Citizen' Havel, as Juraj called him, had arrived in Slovakia and begun a walkabout during the demonstration.
The demonstrators attacked Havel, spat on him, kicked him and shouted abuse at him and the TV crews filmed all of this.
They had, Juraj said, beautiful material of primitive Slovaks attacking the most loved politician in the world.
Havel, he believed, must have known that they would get such footage.
He blamed Havel for coming to Bratislava that day.
He was also outraged by the way friends of his who had become Slovak politicians had been treated; one, he believed, had been accused of being a police informer under the old regime because he opposed Havel's policies on Slovakia.
He noticed that former friends now in power were becoming increasingly pompous.
In his book he wrote of a former colleague:
When I visited him in Prague and tried to explain something which he wasn't prepared to accept as valid, he asked whether I realised I was talking to the Federal Minister of the Interior.
Another example: a director who was spontaneously greeted on the street by her friend's son lectured the boy "the times have changed and you cannot address me as Susanne anymore."
On holidays in the mountains, a minister's wife wanted us to "respect her husband's office".
No one in the political mainstream in Slovakia had ever intended to secede from Czechoslovakia, he insisted, but when Havel announced, for example, that his country was not going to produce arms any more he did so without considering that Slovakia was where the arms were produced, and a sudden shut-down of arms factories would have a devastating effect on the economy there.
Even after separation, Juraj believed, the campaign against Slovakia was still going on; the idea was being put out that the Czechs were good, progressive, smart, intelligent and the Slovaks were unstable, anti-Semitic old-fashioned, pro-communist.
There are differences between the Czechs and the Slovaks, he said.
The Czechs are more eloquent, they have a stronger literary and artistic tradition, they are more secular, like Protestants, and they take ideology seriously.
The Slovaks are more conservative, seventy per cent of them are Catholic, they are more down to earth and not so ready to be influenced by ideology.
The way the Czechs have been treating us, he said, seems OK only because we are Catholics, but if we were Muslims it would be quite different, there would be war.
In Slovakia, he told me, there has never been the same urge for revenge for what happened under the communists, they were ready to forgive; the Czechs, on the other hand, wanted to go through the files and blame people.
They are more cerebral, he said, more interested in money; we are more emotional.
The two nations did not have to separate; but, at the time, there was no better solution.
He himself decided to get out of politics and turned down several offers, including the Ministry for Culture and the ambassadorship to Washington.
He wanted to build up his business and was glad, he laughed, that he did not have to get up in the morning for meetings.
He had been talking for hours, and I had been taking notes and asking questions, and Tana had been listening and adding details.
We were exhausted. It was late. I felt that they still saw themselves as having a role in the new Slovakia, and talking to me, telling me about events from the Slovak point of view, was part of this.
We had a beer.
Juraj went to the phone and discovered that the KDH, the Christian Democratic Party, which had been in a coalition government after the 1990 elections but was now in opposition, was having its annual conference.
It might be difficult for him to go there, he said, making clear that the divisions and splits in the years since the fall of communism had caused a good deal of personal bitterness in Bratislava.
But he would take me there at lunchtime and see what happened.
He and Tana discussed various characters who would be there, people they had worked with just a few years ago, and they laughed at what it would be like for Juraj to appear suddenly at the party conference.
It was hard to sleep after all this information.
Juraj and Tana had talked as though all this had just happened to them, they had spoken with that peculiar intensity of people after an accident or a bereavement.
I tried to think about it, work it all out, but when I saw them again at noon the next day, I felt as though I had not left their company at all.
Juraj had a fancy car outside the apartment building, and I could see, as we sat in it to drive to his studio, that he enjoyed having a car like this.
He put a tape on as he drove up through the city and then along narrow twisting roads, climbing all the time.
The studio was a house in its own grounds at the end of a lane.
I had never really asked what sort of ceramics he made, and there seemed to be no examples in his apartment.
But, here I could see what he did and why it was so successful.
His pieces were elaborate jokes: his tea-pot, for example, was not completely useful, but it would be a good souvenir, or present; it looked well made and funny at the same time.
I could see how it might be more fun making these and marketing them than being the Slovak Ambassador to Washington.
Juraj was thinking about the Christian Democrats, going through the names of people who might be there, wondering whom I should meet. '
The Christian Democrats feel so bad about being out of power,' he said and chuckled.
We drove back down to the city centre; he parked outside a modern building where the conference was going on.
It was now lunchtime, so there should be people free, he said.
As soon as we went into the main hall I could see why Juraj was not a member of the Christian Democrats.
There were groups of men standing around; those who were not middle-aged looked as though they soon would be.
They all had that slightly worn, cautious appearance of men who join centrist political parties.
Juraj might have been the wayward son of any of these men in suits, although he was the same age as some of them.
He was dressed confidently in casual clothes, his hair was styled. He stood out in the hall.
He greeted a few people and then spoke to a man who moved quickly away.
A few people looked at him.
I was standing close to the door.
He came over and said that this wasn't easy, but he thought he might be able to get me a senior figure who spoke English.
One man, with whom he had worked, had moved away from him, he said.
I told him that I had seen this happen.
After a while we were ushered into a long office which was comfortably furnished.
I felt that Juraj was excited being here and was looking forward to what the politician, who was called Jan Carnogursky, was going to say to a foreign journalist.
He was a thin man with a cautious and serious appearance.
His parents were both teachers, he said, but his father had been a political activist before the war and had supported the Slovak state during the war.
After the war he had tried to establish a Catholic party, and was imprisoned.
Carnogursky was brought up as a Catholic.
He went to Mass on Sunday.
Everyone around him, he said, was anti-communist.
He didn't think that anyone in Slovakia was pro-communist, although some people joined the party.
But there was only one youth organisation, which was communist-run and he was a member; almost all young people were members.
He lost three years of schooling because of the political activities of his father; he wasn't allowed into secondary school.
He got a secondary education simply because his father had friends in the north of the country and he went to school there; the communists were not well-organised enough throughout the country to know who he was and prevent him.
He did not support the Prague Spring.
His family remained anti-communist, and the fact that this softening in the regime was run by communists was enough for him.
He managed to study to become a lawyer and specialised in labour law, representing, for example, teachers who had been seen at Mass and fired, or teachers who had sent their children for religious instruction and been fired, or a senior doctor who had attended Mass and was fired.
These were all unwritten rules, he said, and thus could be challenged in the courts.
Later, he defended people who had signed Charter 77, but in 1981 he was banned from practising as a lawyer.
He drove a factory jeep for a while, then worked as a lawyer for the factory, then for a farmers' co-operative.
From 1987 he was unemployed again and the following years he started secretly to edit and distribute Christian Democratic propaganda.
The second half of the 198os, he said, saw the rise of the organised Catholic movement in Slovakia.
There were pilgrimages to holy shrines.
In 1987, for example, he told me, about six hundred thousand people took part in pilgrimages in Slovakia, and through this a self-conscious Catholic movement took shape.
The state allowed and, in certain respects, encouraged an official church, but this was organised by a secret church, and it was the secret church which planned that first demonstration in March 1988, a secret church made up of priests and lay activists.
In 1989 he was imprisoned; in November when the revolution began he was sharing a tiny cell.
He knew that the Berlin Wall had fallen, and he knew there were demonstrations in Prague and Bratislava, but one night he could hear clapping and shouting, he could hear the crowds outside.
That was 23 November 1989 and there were five thousand people demonstrating in front of the prison.
('I was there,' Juraj interjected as Carnogursky described the scene.)
Two days later he was released, let out into the street alone.
He took a tram home.
A few days later he was a member of the delegation which negotiated with the government, demanding the participation of the opposition in a new government, followed by free elections.
He was the only Slovak in the ten-person delegation, but that was not an issue then; overcoming communism, he said, was the aim, everyone's overwhelming aim.
On 10 December, two weeks after he was freed, the government caved in.
He had cars, telephones, a secretariat.
After twenty-five years in opposition all at once he had to become engaged in all aspects of the state.
He just changed his point of view, he said, as if it all had really been very easy.
He was in charge of new legislation, passing, for example, a law governing the freedom of the press.
Although he was based in Prague he started to organise his party in Bratislava.
He had always been aware, he said, of the problems between the Czechs and the Slovaks and he gave me precisely the same definition of the difference as had Juraj.
The Czechs were more rational and western; the Slovaks more emotional.
In ways, he said, the difficulties between the two nations were caused by Czech lethargy in relation to Slovak grievances.
He was not a Slovak nationalist; for him anti-communism was more important.
Nationalism, he said, is always quite easy to misuse, as a means of mobilising people.
A good number of former communists, he told me, quickly became nationalists.
He himself wanted the relationship between the two states to be modelled on states of the European Union.
I asked him about the war years.
During the war, he said, Slovakia was formally independent for the first time.
The Slovak state was quite successful, he said, economically, culturally, politically.
Its president was a Catholic priest, Dr Josef Tiso, and there is, he said, a positive feeling among Catholics about this state.
At the time, Carnogursky believed, Slovakia had two options: to be divided between Poland, Hungary and Germany, or to become a puppet state under Hitler.
The period is controversial, he added.
I merely asked questions.
I did not argue, I underlined what he had said in my notebook: The Slovak state was quite successful, economically, culturally, politically.
I had expected him to hedge his bets, fudge the issue, but he seemed to have no idea how important this was.
It was the same problem as the Croatians had: how to deal with that period when Hitler offered them a quisling state and they accepted, how to deal with history that was still remembered by others such as Serbs and Jews as dark and murderous, but by Croats and Slovaks as the first time they had a state as well as a nation.
